The Project Gutenberg eBook of Lives of Fair and Gallant Ladies. Vol
2., by Seigneur De Brantôme

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Lives of Fair and Gallant Ladies. Vol 2.

Author: Seigneur De Brantôme

Release Date: December 27, 2021 [eBook #67026]

Language: English

Produced by: Chris Curnow, Quentin Campbell, and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The
             Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIVES OF FAIR AND GALLANT
LADIES. VOL 2. ***


                         Transcriber’s Note

In the following transcription, italic text is denoted by _underscores_.
Small capitals in the original text have been transcribed as ALL
CAPITALS.

Superscripts in the text are denoted by a prefixing caret symbol (^).
A letter (as in 8^o), or letters in curly braces (as in I^{er}), that
follow the caret symbol are to be read as superscripts.

See end of this document for details of corrections and other changes.

              —————————————— Start of Book ——————————————


                               Lives of

                        Fair and Gallant Ladies

                                 ————

                               VOLUME II




                  [Illustration: Marguerite of Valois
                       _From an old engraving._]




                                 Lives

                                  Of

                        Fair and Gallant Ladies

                                  By

                       The Seigneur De Brantôme


                     TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL


                                 ————
                               VOLUME II
                                 ————


                     The Alexandrian Society, Inc.

                          London and New York

                                 1922




                          COPYRIGHT, 1922, BY
                     THE ALEXANDRIAN SOCIETY, INC.


                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




       [Illustration: Decorative scrollwork above chapter start]




                               CONTENTS


                                                                PAGE

    INTRODUCTION. BY GEORG HARSDÖRFER                            vii


                            FIFTH DISCOURSE

    TELLING HOW FAIR AND HONORABLE LADIES DO LOVE
        BRAVE AND VALIANT MEN, AND BRAVE MEN COURAGEOUS
        WOMEN                                                      3


                            SIXTH DISCOURSE

    OF HOW WE SHOULD NEVER SPEAK ILL OF LADIES, AND
        OF THE CONSEQUENCES OF SO DOING                           91


                           SEVENTH DISCOURSE

    CONCERNING MARRIED WOMEN, WIDOWS AND MAIDS: TO WIT, WHICH
        OF THESE SAME BE BETTER THAN THE OTHER TO LOVE           151

      ARTICLE   I.  OF THE LOVE OF MARRIED WOMEN                 156
      ARTICLE  II.  OF THE LOVE OF MAIDS                         171
      ARTICLE III.  OF THE LOVE OF WIDOWS                        203

    NOTES                                                        335




       [Illustration: Decorative scrollwork above chapter start]




                             INTRODUCTION


The Mondragola of Machiavelli, which reflects Italian morals at the
time of the Renaissance, is well known. Lafontaine has later made use
of this motif in one of his humorous stories. In the fourth chapter
Liguro arrays in battle order an officer, a valet and a doctor, for a
humorous love expedition. Liguro says: “In the right corner we shall
place Callimaque; I shall place myself in the extreme left corner, and
the doctor in the middle. He will be called St. Cuckold.”

An interlocutor: “Who is this Saint?”

“The greatest Saint of France.”

This question and the answer given are delicious. Brantôme might have
made this witticism even in his time. Perhaps he merely did not write
it down, for after all he could not make too extensive use of his
favorite play with the word “cocu.”

“The cuckold, the greatest Saint of France”; this might have been the
motto of the “Dames Galantes.” Philarete Chasles would have denied
this, of course. He always maintained that Gaul was pure and chaste,
and that if France was full of vice, it had merely been infected by
neighboring peoples. But this worthy academician was well informed
merely regarding Italian influence. He was extremely unaware of the
existence of the cuckold in the sixteenth century. He even asserts in
the strongest terms (in his preface to the edition of 1834) that all
of this had not been so serious; the courtiers had merely desired to
be immoral in an elegant fashion. He even calls Brantôme “un fanfaron
de licence,” a braggart of vice. Indeed he would feel unhappy if he
could not reassure us: “Quand il se plonge dans les impuretes, c’est,
croyez-moi, pure fanfaronnade de vice.” Who would not smile at this
worthy academician who has remained so unfamiliar with the history of
his kings? His “believe me” sounds very well. But the best is yet to
come. The book of the “Dames Galantes” was by no means to be considered
merely a frivolous collection of scandalous anecdotes, but a “curious
historical document.”

There will probably always be a difference of opinion regarding
Brantôme’s position in the history of civilization. It will probably
be impossible to change the judgments of the ordinary superficial
reader. But we do not wish to dispose of Brantôme as simply as that.
It is very easy for a Puritan to condemn him. But we must seek to form
a fairer judgment. Now in order to overcome this difficulty, it is, of
course, very tempting simply to proclaim his importance for the history
of civilization and to put him on the market as such. This would not
be wrong, but this method has been used altogether too freely, both
properly and improperly. Besides, Brantôme is too good to be labelled
in this manner. He does not need it either, he is of sufficient
historical importance even without its being pointed out. The question
now arises: From what point of view are we then to comprehend Brantôme?
We could answer, from the time in which he lived. But that, speaking
in such general terms, is a commonplace. It is not quite correct
either. For in spite of the opinions of the educated we must clearly
distinguish between Brantôme as an author and Brantôme as a man—and we
shall hear more of this bold anarchistic personality, who almost throws
his chamberlain’s key back at the king. This is another striking case
where the author must by no means be identified with his book. These
events might have passed through another person’s mind; they would
have remained the same nevertheless. For Brantôme did not originate
them, he merely chronicled them. Now it usually happens that things
are attributed to an author of which he is entirely innocent (does not
Society make an author pay for his confessions in book-form?). He
is even charged with a crime when he merely reports such events. The
responsibility which Brantôme must bear for his writings is greatly
to be limited. And if our educated old maids simply refuse to be
reconciled with his share we need merely tell them that this share is
completely neutralized by his own personal life.

Brantôme undoubtedly considered himself an historian. That was a
pardonable error. There is a great difference of opinion regarding the
historical value of his reports, the most general opinion being that
Brantôme’s accuracy is in no way to be relied upon, and that he was
more a chronicler and a writer of memoirs. To be sure, Brantôme cannot
prove the historical accuracy of every statement he makes. Who would be
able to give an exact account of this kaleidoscope of details? But the
significance, the symbolic value is there.

In order to substantiate this sharp distinction between the book of
Fair and Gallant Ladies and the supposed character of its author, I
must be permitted to describe France of the sixteenth century. Various
essayists have said that this period had been quite tame and pure
in morals, that Brantôme had merely invented and exaggerated these
stories. But when they began to cite examples, it became evident that
their opinion was like a snake biting its own tail. Their examples
proved the very opposite of their views.

Brantôme’s book could only have been written at the time of the last of
the Valois. These dissolute kings furnished material for his book. Very
few of these exploits can be charged to his own account, and even these
he relates in an impersonal manner. Most of them he either witnessed or
they were related to him, largely by the kings themselves. No matter
in what connection one may read the history of the second half of the
sixteenth century, the dissolute, licentious and immoral Valois are
always mentioned. The kings corrupted this period to such an extent
that Brantôme would have had to be a Heliogabalus in order to make his
own contributions felt.

At the beginning of this period we meet with the influence of the
Italian Renaissance. Through the crusades of Charles VIII., France
came into close contact with it. These kings conducted long wars for
the possession of Milan, Genoa, Siena and Naples. A dream of the
South induced the French to cross the Alps, and every campaign was
followed by a new flood of Italian culture. If at the beginning of the
sixteenth century France was not yet the Capital of grand manners,
it approached this condition with giant strides during the reign of
Francis I. For now there was added an invasion of Spanish culture. Next
to Rome, Madrid had the greatest influence upon Paris. Francis I., this
chivalrous king (1515–1547), introduced a flourishing court life. He
induced Italian artists such as Leonardo and Cellini to come to Blois
and try to introduce the grand Spanish manners into his own court. For
a time France still seemed to be an imitation of Italy, but a poor
one. With the preponderance of the Spanish influence the Etiquette of
Society approached its perfection.

Francis I. therefore brought knighthood into flower. He considered a
nobleman the foremost representative of the people and prized chivalry
more than anything else. The court surrendered itself to a life of
gaiety and frivolity; even at this period the keeping of mistresses
became almost an official institution. “I have heard of the king’s
wish,” Brantôme relates, “that the noblemen of his court should not
be without a lady of their heart and if they did not do as he wished
he considered them simpletons without taste. But he frequently asked
the others the name of their mistresses and promised to help and to
speak for them. Such was his kindness and intimacy.” Francis I. is
responsible for this saying: “A court without women is like a year
without a spring, like a spring without roses.” To be sure, there was
also another side to this court life. There were serious financial
troubles, corruption in administration and sale of offices. The Italian
architects who constructed the magnificent buildings of Saint Germain,
Chantilly, Chambord and Chenonceaux were by no means inexpensive. Great
interest was also taken in literary things. A more refined French was
developed at this period. In Blois a library, Chambre de Librarye,
was established. All of the Valois had great talent in composing
poetic epistles, songs and stories, not merely Marguerite of Navarre,
the sister of Francis I., who following the example of her brother
was a patroness of the arts. To be sure, mention is also made of the
“terrifying immorality” in Pau, even though this may not have been
so bad. Brantôme is already connected with this court life in Pau.
His grandmother, Louise of Daillon, Seneschal of Poitiers, was one
of the most intimate ladies-in-waiting of the Queen of Navarre. His
mother, Anne of Bourdeille, is even introduced in several stories of
the _Heptameron_. She is called Ennasuite, and his father Francis of
Bourdeille appears as Simontaut. Life in the Louvre became more and
more lax. Francis I., this royal Don Juan, is even said to have been
a rival of his son, without our knowing, however, whether this refers
to Catherine of Medici or to Diana of Poitiers. Another version of the
story makes Henri II. a rival of his father for the favor of Diana of
Poitiers. But the well known revenge of that deceived nobleman which
caused the death of Francis I. was entirely unnecessary. It is said
that the king had been intentionally infected. He could not be healed
and died of this disease. At any rate, his body was completely poisoned
by venereal ulcers, when he died. This physical degeneration was a
terrible heritage which he left to his son, Henri II. (1547–1550).

The latter had in the meantime married Catherine of Medici. Italian
depravities now crossed the Alps in even greater numbers. She was
followed by a large number of astrologers, dancers, singers, conjurors
and musicians who were like a plague of locusts. She thus accelerated
the cultural process, she steeped the court of Henri II. as well as
that of his three sons in the spirit of Italy and Spain. (The numerous
citations of Brantôme indicate the frequency and closeness of
relations at this time between France and Spain, the classical country
of chivalry.) But her greed for power was always greater than her
sensual desires. Though of imposing exterior, she was not beautiful,
rather robust, ardently devoted to hunting, and masculine also in the
quantity of food she consumed. She talked extremely well and made
use of her literary skill in her diplomatic correspondence, which is
estimated at about 6,000 letters. She was not, however, spared the
great humiliation of sharing the bed and board of her royal husband
with Madame de Valentinois, Diana of Poitiers, the mistress of Henri
II. In this difficult position with an ignorant and narrow-minded
husband who was moreover completely dominated by his favorites, she
maintained a very wise attitude. Catherine of Medici was, of course, an
intriguing woman who later tried to carry out her most secret purposes
in the midst of her own celebrations.

Henri II. had four sons and a daughter, who were born to him by
Catherine of Medici after ten years of sterility. In them the tragic
fate of the last of the Valois was fulfilled. One after the other
mounts the throne which is devoid of any happiness. The last of them
is consumed when he has barely reached it. The blood of the Valois
would have died out completely but for its continuation in the Bourbons
through Marguerite, the last of the Valois, who with her bewitching
beauty infatuated men and as the first wife of Henri IV. filled the
world with the reports of her scandalous life. There is tragedy in the
fact that the book of Fair and Gallant Ladies was dedicated to Alençon,
the last and youngest of the Valois. Of these four sons each was more
depraved than the other; they furnished the material for Brantôme’s
story. The book of Fair and Gallant Ladies, therefore, also seals the
end of the race.

The line began with Francis II. He mounted the throne when he was a boy
of sixteen. He was as weak mentally as he was physically. He died in
1560, less than a year later, “as a result of an ulcer in the head.”
Then Catherine of Medici was Regent for ten years. In 1571 the next
son, Charles, was old enough to mount the throne. He was twenty-two
years old, tall and thin, weak on his legs, with a stooping position
and sickly pale complexion. Thus he was painted by François Clouet,
called Janet, a famous painting which is now in possession of the Duke
of Aumale. While a young prince, he received the very best education.
His teachers were Amyot and Henri Estienne, with whom he read Plotin,
Plato, Virgil, Cicero, Tacitus, Polybius and Machiavelli. Amyot’s
translation of Plutarch’s Lives delighted the entire court. “The
princesses of the House of France,” Brantôme relates, “together with
their ladies-in-waiting and maids-of-honor, took the greatest pleasure
in the sayings of the Greeks and Romans which have been preserved
by sweet Plutarch.” Thus literature came into its own even in this
court life. But they did not merely do homage to the old classical
literature, all of them were also versed in the art of the sonnet, and
were able to rhyme graceful love songs as well as Ronsard. Charles IX.
himself wrote poetry and translated the Odes of Horace into French.
His effeminate nature, at one moment given to humiliating excesses
and in the next consumed by pangs of conscience, was fond of graceful
and frivolous poetry. But there was also some good in this movement.
Whereas the French language had been officially designated in 1539
as the Language of Law, to be used also in lectures, Charles IX. now
gave his consent in 1570 for the founding of a Society to develop
and purify the language. But even in this respect the honest de Thou
denounced “this depraved age” and spoke of “the poisoning of women
by immoral songs.” This worthy man himself wrote Latin, of course.
A time of disorder was now approaching, the revolts of the Huguenots
were sweeping through France. But these very disorders and dangers
encouraged a certain bold carelessness and recklessness. Murder was
slinking through the streets. It was the year of St. Bartholomew’s Eve.
The Duke of Anjou himself relates that he feared to be stabbed by his
own brother king, Charles IX., and later when he himself mounted the
throne his brother Alençon was in conspiracy against him. The Mignons
and the Rodomonts, the coxcombs and braggarts, were increasing at this
depraved court. Soon it was able seriously to compete with Madrid and
Naples. Indeed the people down there now began to look up to France as
the centre of fashion. Brantôme was the first to recognize this and he
was glad of it. Indeed he even encouraged it. Even at that time the
Frenchman wished to be superior to all other people.

The king was completely broken by the results of St. Bartholomew’s Eve.
His mind wandered back and forth. He became gloomy and vehement, had
terrible hallucinations, and heard the spirits of the dead in the air.
By superhuman exertions he tried to drown his conscience and procure
sleep. He was constantly hunting, remaining in the saddle continuously
from twelve to fourteen hours and often three days in succession. When
he did not hunt he fenced or played ball or stood for three to four
hours at the blacksmith’s anvil swinging an enormous hammer. Finally,
consumption forced him to stay in bed. But even now he passed his time
by writing about his favorite occupation, he was composing the _Livre
du Roy Charles_, a dissertation on natural history and the deer hunt.
When he reached the twenty-ninth chapter death overtook him. This
fragment deserves praise, it was well thought out and not badly written.

It is always unpleasant to say of a king that he had more talent to
be an author than a king. It is unfortunate but true that the Valois
were a literary race. But France itself in 1577 was in a sorry state.
Everywhere there were ruins of destroyed villages and castles. There
were enormous stretches of uncultivated land and cattle-raising was
greatly diminished. There were many loafing vagabonds accustomed to war
and robbery who were a danger to the traveller and the farmer. Every
province, every city, almost every house was divided against itself.

Francis of Alençon, the fourth of these brothers, who felt himself
coming of age, the last of the Valois, had already begun his agitation.
Charles IX. despised him and suspected his secret intrigues. His other
brother, Henri, had to watch his every step in order to feel secure.

Henri III. (1574–1589), formerly Henri of Anjou, was barely twenty-five
years old when his strength was exhausted. But his greed of power which
had already made him king of the Polish throne was still undiminished.
He was the most elegant, the most graceful and the most tasteful of the
Valois. It was therefore only to be expected that he would introduce
new forms of stricter etiquette. D’Aubigne relates that he was a good
judge of the arts, and that he was “one of the most eloquent men of
his age.” He was always on the search for poetry to gratify his erotic
impulses. A life of revelry and pleasure now began in the palace.
Immorality is the mildest reproach of his contemporary chroniclers.
Although well educated and a friend of the Sciences, of Poetry and the
Arts, as well as gifted by nature with a good mind, he was nevertheless
very frivolous, indifferent, physically and mentally indolent. He
almost despised hunting as much as the conscientious discharge of
government affairs. He greatly preferred to be in the society of women,
himself dressed in a feminine fashion, with two or three rings in
each ear. He usually knew what was right and proper, but his desires,
conveniences and other secondary matters prevented him from doing it.
He discharged all the more serious and efficient men and surrounded
himself with insignificant coxcombs, the so-called Mignons, with
whom he dallied and adorned himself, and to whom he surrendered the
government of the state. These conceited young men, who were without
any redeeming merit, simply led a gay life at the court. In his History
of France (I, 265), Ranke relates: “He surrounded himself with young
people of pleasing appearance who tried to outdo him in cleanliness of
dress and neatness of appearance. To be a favorite, a Mignon, was not
a question of momentary approval but a kind of permanent position.”
Assassinations were daily occurrences. D’Aubigne severely criticized
the terrifying conditions in the court and public life in general. A
chronicler says: “At that time anything was permitted except to say
and do what was right and proper.” This frivolous, scandalous court
consumed enormous sums of money. Such a miserable wretch as Henri III.
required for his personal pleasures an annual sum of 1,000,000 gold
thalers, which is equivalent to about $10,000,000 in present values,
and yet the entire state had to get along with 6,000,000 thalers. For
this was all that could be squeezed out of the country. Ranke says
(page 269): “In a diary of this period, the violent means of obtaining
money and the squandering of the same by the favorites are related side
by side, and it shows the disagreeable impression that these things
made.” Then there was also the contrast between his religious and his
worldly life. At one time he would steep his feelings in orgies, then
again he would parade them in processions. He was entirely capable of
suddenly changing the gayest raiment for sackcloth and ashes. He would
take off his jewel-covered belt and put on another covered with skulls.
And in order that Satan might not be lacking, the criminal court
(“chambre ardente”) which was established at Blois had plenty of work
to do during his reign. It was also evident that he would never have
any children with his sickly wife.

This same Henry III. while still Duke of Orleans tried to gain the
favor of Brantôme, who was then twenty-four years old, and when he
entered upon his reign appointed him his chamberlain. This appointment
took place in 1574. At the same time, however, Francis of Alençon
sought his favor. Subsequently Brantôme entered into very intimate
relations with him.

Alençon is described to us as being small though well built but with
coarse, crude features, with the temper and irritability of a woman and
even greater cowardliness, likewise unreliable, ambitious and greedy.
He was a very vain, frivolous person without political or religious
convictions. From his youth up he was weak and sickly. His brother
Henri despised and hated him and kept him a barely concealed prisoner
as long as he could. Then Alençon revolted, gathered armies, founded a
new Ultra-Royal party and moved on Paris. He even wished at one time to
have his mother removed from the court, who was still carrying on her
intrigues throughout the entire kingdom. They were obliged to negotiate
with him and he succeeded in extorting an indemnity which was almost
equal to a royal authority. He received five duchies and four earldoms
and his court had the power of passing death sentences. He had a guard
and a corps of pages in expensive liveries and conducted a brilliant
court. We must try and picture him as Ranke describes him, “small
and stocky, of an obstinate bearing, bushy black hair over his ugly
pock-marked face, which, however, was brightened by a fiery eye.”

The book of Fair and Gallant Ladies is dedicated to Alençon, but he did
not see it any more. Brantôme, however, must have begun it while he was
still living. Alençon died in 1584 at the age of thirty-one.

Five years later Henri III. was stabbed by Jacques Clement. Thus the
race of Henri III., which was apparently so fruitful, had withered in
his sons. The remaining sister, who was inferior according to the Salic
Law, was also extremely immoral.

Her husband, Henry IV., entered a country that was completely
exhausted. The state debt at the time he entered upon his reign clearly
showed the spirit of the previous governments. In 1560 the state debt
was 43,000,000 livres. At the end of the century it had risen to
300,000,000. The Valois sold titles and dignities to the rich, squeezed
them besides and were finally capable of mortgaging anything they could
lay their hands upon. In 1595 Henri IV. remarked in Blois that “the
majority of the farms and almost all the villages were uninhabited and
empty.” This mounting of the state debt clearly indicates the extent of
the depravity of the court. During the reign of Charles IX. and Henri
III., that is between 1570 and 1590, the dissoluteness reached its
height and this made it possible for Brantôme to collect such a large
number of stories and anecdotes. Catherine of Medici, who outlived her
race by a year and whose influence continued during this entire period,
does not seem to have been a saint herself. But the last three of the
Valois were the worst, the most frivolous and lascivious of them all.
It was during their reign that the rule of mistresses was at its height
in the Louvre and the royal castles which furnished Brantôme with his
inexhaustible material. Such were the Valois.

This is the background of Brantôme’s life. We should like to know more
about him. He has written about many generals and important women of
his age, but there are only fragments regarding himself.

The family Bourdeille is one of the most important in Perigord. Like
other old races they sought to trace their ancestors back into the
times of Gaul and Rome. Charlemagne is said to have founded the Abbey
Brantôme.

Brantôme’s father was the “first page of the royal litter.” His son
speaks of him as “un homme scabreaux, haut a la main et mauvais
garçon.” His mother, a born Châtaigneraie, was lady-in-waiting of the
Queen of Navarre. Pierre was probably also born in Navarre, but nothing
is known as to the exact day of birth. Former biographers simply
copied, one from the other, that he had died in 1614 at the age of
eighty-seven. This would make 1528 the year of his birth. But now it is
well known that Brantôme spent the first years of his life in Navarre.
Queen Marguerite died in 1549 and Brantôme later writes of his sojourn
at her court: “Moy estant petit garçon en sa court.” Various methods of
calculation seem to indicate that he was born in 1540.

After the death of the Queen of Navarre—this is also a matter of
record—Brantôme went to Paris to take up his studies. From Paris,
where he probably also was a companion of the _enfants sanssouci_, he
went to Poitiers to continue them. There in 1555, while still “a young
student,” he became acquainted with the beautiful Gotterelle, who is
said to have had illicit relations with the Huguenot students. When he
had completed his studies in 1556 he as the youngest son had to enter
the church. He also received his share of the Abbey Brantôme from Henri
II. as a reward for the heroisms of his older brother. This young abbot
was about sixteen years old. His signature and his title in family
documents in this period are very amusing: “Révérend père en Dieu abbè
de Brantôme.” As an abbot he had no ecclesiastical duties. He was his
own pastor, could go to war, get married and do as he pleased. But
nevertheless, this ecclesiastical position did not suit him, and so he
raised 500 gold thalers by selling wood from his forests with which he
fitted himself out and then went off to Italy at the age of eighteen:
“Portant L’coquebuse a meche et un beau fourniment de Milan, monte
sur une haquenee de cent ecus et menant toujours six on sept gentils
hommes, armes et montes de meme, et bien en point sur bons courtands.”

He simply went off wherever there was war. In Piedmont he was shot in
the face by an arrow which almost deprived him of his sight. There he
was lying in Portofino in these marvellously beautiful foothills along
the Genoese coast, and there he was strangely healed: “Une fort belle
dame de la ma jettait dans les yeux du lait de ses beaux et blancs
tetins” (_Vies des Capitaines français_, Ch. IV, 499). Then he went
to Naples with François de Guise. He himself describes his reception
by the Duke of Alcala. Here he also became acquainted with Madame de
Guast, die Marquise del Vasto.

In 1560 he left Italy and took up the administration of his estates
which heretofore had been in the hands of his oldest brother, Andre.
He joined the court in Amboise, where Francis II. was conducting
tournaments. At the same time the House of Guise took notice of him.
In recollection of his uncle, La Châtaigneraie, he was offered high
protection at the court of Lorraine. From this time on he was at the
court for over thirty years. At first he accompanied the Duke of Guise
to his castle. Then after the death of Francis II. he accompanied his
widow, Mary Stuart, to England in August, 1561, and heard her final
farewell to France.

Although Brantôme could not say enough in praise of the princes of
Lorraine, the Guises, he did not go over to their side. Once at a later
period when he was deeply embittered he allowed himself to be carried
away by them. At the outbreak of the civil wars, Brantôme, of course,
sided with the court. He also participated in the battle of Dreux. If
there happened to be no war in France he would fight somewhere abroad.
In 1564 he entered into closer relations with the court of the Duke of
Orleans (later Henri III.). He became one of his noblemen and received
600 livres annually. (The receipts are still in existence.) In the
same year he also took part in an expedition against the Berbers on
the Coast of Morocco. We find him in Lisbon and in Madrid, where he
was highly honored by the courts. When Sultan Soliman attacked Malta,
Brantôme also hurried thither. He returned by way of Naples and again
presented himself to the Marquise de Guast. He thought that at last he
had found his fortune but he felt constrained to continue his journey.
He later denounces this episode in the most vehement terms. “Toujours
trottant, traversant et vagabondant le monde.” He was on his way to a
new war in Hungary, but when he arrived in Venice he heard that it was
not worth while. He returned by way of Milan and Turin, where he gave
the impression of being greatly impoverished, but he was too proud to
accept the purse of the Duchess of Savoy.

In the meantime, the Huguenots had forced the king to make greater
and greater concessions. Prince Condé and Admiral Coligny had the
upper hand. The Huguenots, who heard that Brantôme had reasons to
be displeased with the king, tried to induce him to commit treason.
But Brantôme remained firm. He was given the title Captain (“Maître
de camp”) of two companies even though he only had one—but that is
typical of the French. This company (enseigne) was under his command in
the Battle of St. Venis (1567). In the following year, 1568, Charles
IX. engaged him as a paid chamberlain. After the Battle of Jarnac in
the following year he was seized by a fever, as a result of which he
had to spend almost a year on his estates in order to recover.

As soon as he was well again he wished to go off to war somewhere.
He complained that it had been impossible for him to participate
in the Battle of Lepanto. His friend, Strozzi, was now getting
ready an expedition to Peru, which was to recompense him. But some
misunderstanding caused his separation from Strozzi shortly afterwards.
The preparations for this expedition had, however, kept him away from
St. Bartholomew’s Eve, even though later he cursed them for personal
reasons.

Brantôme was not religious. He cannot be considered a good judge in
affairs of the Huguenots, for he was more than neutral in religious
matters. He took an indifferent attitude towards the League. For as
a secular priest, he had the very best reasons for being neither in
favor of the League nor of the Huguenots. He speaks with great respect
of Coligny. They frequently met and the admiral was always friendly.
Brantôme disapproved of the Massacre of St. Bartholomew’s Eve and
considered it entirely reprehensible and purposeless. This good warrior
would have greatly preferred to have seen these restless spirits
engaged in a foreign war. He says of this bloody eve: “Mort malheurse
lu puis—je bien appeller pour toute la France.” To be sure, in the
following year he was present at the Siege of La Rochelle, the White
City.

He was at the court when Charles IX. died. He accompanied the corpse
from Notre Dame to St. Denis and then entered the services of Henri
III., who finally bestowed some favors upon the brothers Bourdeille and
gave them the Bishopric of Perigneux.

Then this restless soul was driven to approach Alençon, the youngest
of the Valois. Bussy d’Amboise, the foremost nobleman of Alençon, was
his friend. Alençon overwhelmed him with kindness and Brantôme had to
beg the angry king’s pardon for his defection.

But now an event occurred which almost drove Brantôme into open
rebellion. In 1582 his oldest brother died. The Abbey had belonged
to both of them, but his brother had appointed his own heir and the
king was helpless against this. Brantôme became very angry because he
was not the heir. “Je ne suis qu’un ver de terre,” he writes. He now
desired that the king should at least give his share of the Abbey to
his nephew, but he was unsuccessful in this as well. Aubeterre became
Seneschal and Governor of Perigord. This fault-finder could not control
his anger: “Un matin, second jour de premier de l’an ... je luy en fis
ma plainte; il m’en fit des excuses, bien qu’il fust mon roy. Je ne luy
respondis autre chose sinon: Eh bien, Sire, vous ne m’avez donne se
coup grand subject de vous faire jainais service comme j’ay faict.” And
so he ran off “fort despit.” As he left the Louvre he noticed that the
golden chamberlain’s key was still hanging on his belt; he tore it off
and threw it into the Seine, so great was his anger.

(When Aubeterre died in 1593 these posts were returned to the family
Bourdeille.)

(Other reasons which angered Brantôme were less serious. Thus he could
not bear Montaigne because the latter was of more recent nobility. He
himself has shown that a man of the sword could very well take up the
pen to pass the time. But he could not understand that the opposite
might happen, and a sword given to a man of the pen. He was appointed
a knight in the Order of St. Michael. But this did not satisfy his
ambition very much when he looked around and saw that he had to share
this distinction with many other men. He wished to have it limited
to the nobility of the sword. Now his neighbor, Michel de Montaigne,
received the same order. Brantôme writes regarding this: “We have seen
councillors leave the courts of justice, put down their robe and their
four-cornered hat and take up a sword. Immediately the king bestowed
the distinction upon them without their ever having gone to war. This
has happened to Monsieur de Montaigne, who would have done better
to remain at his trade and continue to write his essays rather than
exchange his pen for a sword which was not nearly so becoming.”)

Henri II. pardoned him his unmannerly behavior, but the king’s rooms
were closed to him. Then the Duke of Alençon wished to gain his
allegiance and appointed him chamberlain, thereby rewarding him for the
intimate relationship which had existed between them ever since 1579.
The duke was the leader of the dissatisfied and so this fault-finder
was quite welcome to him. The book of Fair and Gallant Ladies is the
direct result of the conversations at the Court of Alençon, for we hear
that Brantôme soon wrote a few discourses which he dedicated to the
prince. Brantôme sold himself to Alençon, which is almost to be taken
literally. Then Alençon died. Brantôme’s hopes were now completely
crushed.

What was he to do now? He was angry at the king. His boundless anger
almost blinded him. Then the Guises approached him and tried to induce
him to swear allegiance to the enemies of the Valois. He was quite
ready to do this and was at the point of committing high treason, for
the King of Spain was behind the Guises, to whom he swore allegiance.
But the outbreak of the war of the Huguenots, which resulted in a
temporary depreciation of all estates, prevented him from carrying
out his plans immediately. He could not sell anything, and without
money life in Spain was impossible. But this new state of affairs gave
him new energy and new life. He walked about with “sprightly vigor.”
He later described his feelings in the _Capitaines français_ (Ch.
IV, 108): “Possible que, si je fusse venu an bout de vies attantes
et propositions, J’eusse faut plus de mal a ma patrie que jamais n’a
faict renegat d’Alger a’la sienne, dont J’en fusse este mandict a
perpetuite, possible de Dieu et des hommes.”

Then a horse that he was about to mount, shied, rose up and fell,
rolling over him, so that all his ribs were broken. He was confined to
his bed for almost four years; crippled and lame, without being able to
move because of pain.

When he was able to rise again the new order of things was in full
progress, and when the iron hand of Henri IV., this cunning Navarrese
and secret Huguenot, swept over France, the old court life also
disappeared. Brantôme was sickly and when the old Queen-mother Medici
also died (1590) he buried himself completely in his abbey and took no
interest henceforth in the events of his time.

“Chaffoureur du papier”—this might be the motto of his further life.
Alas, writing was also such a resignation for Brantôme, otherwise he
would not have heaped such abuse upon it. But we must not imagine
that his literary talent only developed after his unfortunate fall.
Naturally he made quite different and more extensive use of it under
these conditions than he otherwise would have done. Stirring up his old
memories became more and more a means of mastering the sterile life
of that period. Literature is a product of impoverished life. It is
the opium intoxication of memory, the conjuring up of bygone events.
The death-shadowed eyes of Alençon had seen the first fragments of the
book of Fair and Gallant Ladies. The _Rondomontades Espagnoles_ must
have been finished in 1590, for he offered them to the Queen of Navarre
in the Castle of Usson in Auvergne. But beginning in 1590 there was a
conscious exchange of the sword for the pen. He knew himself well. On
his bed of pain the recollections of his varied life, his sufferings
and the complaints of his thwarted ambitions became a longed-for
distraction. He died July 15, 1614, and was buried in the Chapel of
Richemond.

His manuscripts had a strange fate. They were the principal care of his
last will and testament. This in itself is a monument to his pride.
“J’ai bien de l’ambition,” he writes, “je la veux encore monstrer
apres ma mort.” He had decided elements of greatness. The books in his
library were to remain together, “set up in the castle and not to be
scattered hither and thither or loaned to anyone.” He wished to have
the library preserved “in eternal commemoration of himself.” He was
particularly interested in having his works published. He pretended to
be a knight, and a nobleman, and yet he prized most highly these six
volumes beautifully bound in blue, green and black velvet. His books,
furthermore, were not to be published with a pseudonym, but his own
name was to be openly printed on the title-page. He does not wish to be
deprived of his labors and his fame. He gave the strictest instructions
to his heirs, but he was constantly forced to make additions to the
will, because his executors died. He outlived too many of them and had
made his will too early. The instructions regarding the printing of his
books are very amusing: “Pour les faire imprimer mieux a ma fantaisie,
... y’ordonne et veux, que l’on prenne sur ma lotate heredite l’argent
qu ’en pouvra valoir la dite impression, et qui ne se pouvra certes
monter a beaucoup, cur j’ay veu force imprimeurs ... que s’ils out mis
une foys la veue, en donneront plusoost pour les imprimer qu’ils n’en
voudraient recepvoir; car ils en impriment plusierus gratis que no
valent pas les mieux. Je m’en puys bien vanter, mesmes que je les ay
monstrez au moins en partie, a aueuns qui les ont voulu imprimer sans
rien.... Mais je n’ay voulu qu ils fussent imprimez durant mon vivant.
Surtout, je veux que la dicte impression en soit en belle et gross
lettre, et grand colume, pour mieux paroistre....” The typographical
directions are quite modern. The execution of the will finally came
into the hands of his niece, the Countess of Duretal, but on account of
the offence that these books might give, she hesitated to carry out the
last will of her uncle. Then his later heirs refused to have the books
published, and locked the manuscripts in the library. In the course of
time, however, copies came into circulation, more and more copies were
made, and one of them found its way into the office of a printer. A
fragment was smuggled into the memoirs of Castelnau and was printed
with them in 1659. A better edition was now not far off. In 1665 and
1666 the first edition was published in Leyden by Jean Sambix. It
comprised nine volumes in Elzevir. This very incomplete and unreliable
edition was printed from a copy. Speculating printers now made a number
of reprints. A large number of manuscripts were now in circulation
which were named according to the copyists. In the 17th and 18th
centuries these books were invariably printed from copies. The edition
of 1822, _Oeuvres completes du seigneur de Brantôme_ (Paris: Foucault),
was the first to go back to the original manuscripts in possession of
the family Bourdeille. Monmergue edited it. The manuscript of the book
of Fair and Gallant Ladies was in the possession of the Baroness James
Rothschild as late as 1903. After her death in the beginning of 1904,
it came into possession of the National Library in Paris, which now has
all of Brantôme’s manuscripts, and also plans to publish a critical
revised edition of his collected works.

The two books, _Vies des Dames illustres_ and _Vies des Dames
galantes_, were originally called by Brantôme Premier and Second Livre
des Dames. The new titles were invented by publishers speculating on
the taste of the times, which from 1660 to 1670 greatly preferred the
words illustre and galante. The best subsequent edition of the Fair and
Gallant Ladies is that printed by Abel Ledoux in Paris, 1834, which
was edited by Philarete Chasles, who also supplied an introduction and
notes. On the other hand, the critical edition of his collected works
in 1822 still contains the best information regarding Brantôme himself,
and the remarks by the editor Monmergue are very excellent and far
superior to the opinions which Philarete Chasles expresses, poetic as
they may be. The crayon-drawings and copper-cuts of Famous and Gallant
Ladies of the sixteenth century contained in Bouchot’s book, _Les
femmes de Brantôme_, are very good; Bouchot’s text, however, is merely
a re-hash of Brantôme himself. Neither must one over-estimate his
reflections regarding the author of the Fair and Gallant Ladies.

There is a great difference between the two Livres des Dames. What is
an advantage in the one is a disadvantage in the other. Undoubtedly
Brantôme’s genius is best expressed in the _Dames Galantes_. In this
book the large number of symbolical anecdotes is the best method of
narration. In the other they are more or less unimportant. Of course,
Brantôme could not escape the questionable historical methods of
that period, but shares these faults with all of his contemporaries.
Besides, he was too good an author to be an excellent historian. The
devil take the historical connection, as long as the story is a good
one.

The courtier Brantôme sees all of history from the perspective of
boudoir-wit. Therefore his portraits of famous ladies of his age are
mere mosaics of haphazard observations and opinions. He is a naïve
story-teller and therefore his ideas are seldom coherent. The value
of his biographical portraits consists in the fact that they are
influenced by his manner of writing, that they are the result of
scandal and gossip which he heard in the Louvre, or of conversations
in the saddle or in the trenches. He always preserves a respectful
attitude and restrains himself from spicing things too freely. He did
not allow himself to become a purveyor of malicious gossip, he took
great care not to offend his high connections by unbridled speech, but
his book lost interest on that account.

If we wish to do justice to Brantôme as the author of Fair and Gallant
Ladies, we must try and picture his position in his age and in his
society. It is not to be understood that he suddenly invented all
of these stories during his long illness. Let us try and follow the
origin of these memoirs. At that time the most primitive conceptions
of literary work in general prevailed. The actual writing down of the
stories was the least. An author laboriously working out his stories
was ridiculous. The idea and the actual creative work came long before
the moment when the author sat down to write. None of Brantôme’s
stories originated in his abbey, but in Madrid, in Naples, in Malta
before La Rochelle, in the Louvre, in Blois and in Alençon. Writing
down a story was a reproduction of what had already been created, of
what had been formed and reformed in frequent retelling and polished
to perfection. The culture of the court was of great aid to him in his
style, but his own style was nevertheless far superior.

For decades Brantôme was a nobleman of his royal masters. He was
constantly present at the court and participated in all of the major
and minor events of its daily life, in quarrels and celebrations. He
was a courtier. He was entirely at home in the halls and chambers
of the Louvre, but even though he stopped to chat with the idle
courtiers in the halls of the Louvre he never lowered himself to their
level. He could be extremely boisterous, yet inwardly he was reserved
and observant. He was the very opposite of the noisy, impetuous
Bussy-Rabutin. His intelligence and his wisdom made him a source of
danger among the chamberlains. His was a dual nature, he was at the
same time cynical and religious, disrespectful and enthusiastic,
refined and brutal, at the same time abbot, warrior and courtier. Like
Bernhard Palissy he ridiculed the astrologers, yet he was subject to
the superstitions of his age. His temperament showed that his cradle
had not been far from the banks of the Garonne, near the Gascogne.
There was combined with his bold, optimistic, adventurous and restless
spirit, with his chivalrous ideas and prejudices, a boundless vanity.
A contemporary said of him: “He was as boastful as Cellini.” Indeed
he believed himself far superior to his class, he not only boasted
of himself and his family, but also of his most insignificant deeds.
He was irreconcilable in hate, and even admonished his heirs to
revenge him. His royal masters he treated with respect tempered by
irony. As a contemporary of Rabelais, Marot and Ronsard, he was an
excellent speaker. If Rabelais had a Gallic mind then Brantôme’s was
French. His cheerful and lively conversation was pleasing to all. He
had a reputation of being a brilliant man. But he was also known as
a discreet person. Alençon, who was a splendid story-teller himself
and liked to hear love stories more than anything else, preferred
conversation with him to anyone. His naïveté and originality made
friends for him everywhere. He had a brave and noble nature and was
proud of being a Frenchman, he was the personified _gentilhomme
français_.

And thus his book originated. He must have taken up his pen quite
spontaneously one day. Now from the great variety of his own
experiences at court and in war, he poured forth a remarkable wealth
of peculiar and interesting features which his memory had preserved.
It is a book of the love-life during the reign of the Valois. These
stories were not invented, but they were anecdotes and reports taken
from real life. He was able to evade the danger of boredom. There is
style even in his most impudent indiscretions. He only stopped at mere
obscenities. On the other hand, he never hesitated to be cynical. As
this age was fond of strong expressions, a puritanical language was out
of the question. Not until the reign of Louis XIV. did the language
become more polite. Neither was Brantôme a Puritan, how could he have
been? But he had character. He took pleasure in everything which was
a manifestation of human energy. He loved passion and the power to
do good or evil. (To be sure he also had some splendid things to say
against immoderacy and vehemence of passions. So he was a fit companion
of the Medici and the Valois.)

There is not much composition in his books. His attention wandered
from one story to the other. Boccaccio, the foremost story-teller
of this period, is more logical. An academical critic says of
Brantôme: “He reports without choice what is good and bad, what is
noble and abominable, the good not without warmth, but the bad with
indestructible cheerfulness.” There is neither order nor method in his
writing. He passes on abruptly, without motif, without transition. A
courtier, unfamiliar with the rules of the school, he himself confesses
(in the _Rodomontades Espagnoles_): “Son pen de profession du scavoir
et de l’art de bien dire, et remet aux meux disans la belle disposition
de paroles eloquentes.” Because of the variety his stories have unusual
charm. In these numerous anecdotes the graceful indecencies of the
ladies-in-waiting at the court of the Valois are described as if they
had happened openly. His reports of the illicit relations are rendered
in a charming style. Even though his sketches and pictures are modelled
entirely on the life at the courts, nevertheless he adds two personal
elements: an amusing smile and a remarkable literary talent. The
following may even have been the case. In the beginning Brantôme may
have taken an entirely neutral attitude towards the material at hand,
but took no greater personal interest in them than he would, say, in
memoirs. But when we can tell a story well, then we also take pleasure
in our ability. We permeate the story with our own enjoyment, and in
a flash it turns out to be pleasure in the thing itself. The light
of our soul glows upon them and then the things themselves look like
gold. Brantôme rarely breaks through his reserve. He usually keeps
his own opinions regarding these grand ladies and gentlemen in the
background, he leaves it to the competent “grands discoureurs” to judge
these things. To be sure, if one wished to get information regarding
the court of Henri II. and Catherine of Medici, one ought not exactly
to read Brantôme, who creates the impression as if the court were a
model of a moral institution. “Sa compaignie et sa court estait un vray
paradis du monde et escole de toute honnestate, de virtu, l’ornement
de la France,” he once says somewhere in the _Dames illustres_ (page
64). On the other hand, L’Etorle in May, 1577, gives us a report of a
banquet given by the Queen-mother in Chenonceaux: “Les femmes les plus
belles et honnestes de la cour, estant a moitie nues et ayant, les
cheveux epars comme espousees, fuient employees a faire le service.”
Other contemporaries likewise report a great deal of the immorality
prevailing at the court. Thus we have curious reports regarding the
pregnancy of Limeuil, who had her birth-throes in the queen’s wardrobe
in Lyon (1564), the father being the Prince of Conde. Likewise, Johanna
d’Albret warns her son, later Henri IV., against the corruption of the
court. When she later visited him in Paris she was horrified at the
immorality at the court of her daughter-in-law, later Queen Margot, who
lived in the “most depraved and dissolute society.” (Brantôme pretended
that he was a relative of hers, and pronounced a panegyric upon her in
his Rodomontades which was answered in her memoirs dedicated to him.)
He did not feel it his mission to be a Savonarola. To his great regret
this “culture” came home to him in his own family. He had more and
more cause to be dissatisfied with his youngest sister, Madeleine. The
wicked life of this lady-in-waiting filled him with fury. He paid her
her share and drove her from the house.

Certain Puritans among the historians find fault with Brantôme for
having uncovered the “abominations” at the courts of the Valois. His
vanity may have led him to make many modifications in the events, but
most of these are probably due to his desire to be entertaining. In his
dedication to the _Rodomontades Espagnoles_ he addresses Queen Margot
as follows: “Bien vous dirai-je, que ce que j’escrits est plein de
verite; de ce que j’ay veu, je l’asseure, di ce que j’ay seen et appris
d’autray, si on m’a trompe je n’en puis mais si tiens-je pourtant
beaucoup de choses de personnages et de livres tres-veritables et
dignes de foy.” Nevertheless, his method was very primitive. In his
descriptions of personalities, he had a thread on which he could string
up his recollections, so that there was at least some consistency.
In the book of Fair and Gallant Ladies the individual fact is of
less importance and has more of symbolic value. They are pictures of
the time composed of a confusing multitude of anecdotes. Perhaps
the subject-matter required this bizarre method. The _Heptameron_ of
Marguerite of Navarre was altogether too precise. Brantôme was a man
of the sword and a courtier, but a courtier who occasionally liked to
put his hand on his sword in between his witticisms. In this state of
mind, he was an excellent story-teller, and his anecdotes and stories
therefore also have the actuality and the vigorous composition of
naïvely related stories.

The book of Fair and Gallant Ladies still contains much of historical
value. Almost all the old noble races are mentioned; there is
information regarding Navarre, Parma, Florence, Rome and Toulouse. The
Huguenots likewise appear, and St. Bartholomew’s Eve (1572), which
was far back, still sheds its gloom over these pages. The trenches
before La Rochelle play an important part; Brantôme always fought
against the Huguenots. Perhaps this was the reason why he was no
longer in favor with the Bourbon Henri IV. However, one cannot charge
him with animosity. Perhaps the frank and open methods of reforming
had affected him. Without taking interest in religious quarrels, he
probably also hated the monks and priests. Thus one would be inclined
to say to the Puritans who condemn Brantôme: If one may speak of guilt
and responsibility, then it is his age which must bear them. Brantôme
merely chronicled the morals of his times. The material was furnished
to him, he merely wrote it down. He is no more responsible for his
book, than an editor of a newspaper for the report of a raid or a bomb
attack. Ranke once said regarding the times of Henri II.: “If one
wishes to know the thoughts and opinions of France at that period, one
must read Rabelais” (History of France, Ch. I, 133). Whoever wishes to
become familiar with the age of Charles IX. and Henri III. must read
Brantôme.

                                                    GEORG HARSDÖRFER.

  (Translated from the German.)




                           LIVES OF FAIR AND
                            GALLANT LADIES




       [Illustration: Decorative scrollwork above chapter start]




                            FIFTH DISCOURSE

         Telling how fair and honourable ladies do love brave
           and valiant men, and brave men courageous women.[1*]


                                  1.

It hath ever been the case that fair and honourable ladies have loved
brave and valiant men, albeit by natural bent they be cowardly and
timid creatures. But such a virtue doth valour possess with them, as
that they do grow altogether enamoured thereof. What else is this but
to constrain their exact opposite to love them, and this spite of their
own natural complexion? And for an instance of this truth, Venus,
which in ancient days was the goddess of Beauty, and of all gentle and
courteous bearing, being fain, there in the skies and at the Court of
Jupiter, to choose her some fair and handsome lover and so make cuckold
her worthy husband Vulcan, did set her choice on never a one of the
pretty young gallants, those dapper, curled darlings, whereof were so
many to hand, but did select and fall deep in love with the god Mars,
god of armies and warlike prowess,—and this albeit he was all foul and
a-sweat with the wars he had but just come from, and all besmirched
with dust and as filthy as might be, more smacking of the soldier in
the field than the gallant at Court. Nay! worse still, very oft mayhap
all bloody, as returning from battle, he would so lie with her, without
any sort of cleansing of himself or scenting of his person.

Again, the fair and high-born Penthesilea, Queen of the Amazons, having
learned of fame concerning the valour and prowess of the doughty
Hector, and his wondrous feats of arms which he did before Troy against
the Greeks, did at the mere report of all this grow so fondly enamoured
of the hero, that being fain to have so valiant a knight for father of
her children, her daughters to wit which should succeed to her kingdom,
she did hie her forth to seek him at Troy. There beholding him, and
contemplating and admiring his puissance, she did all ever she could to
find favour with him, not less by the brave deeds of war she wrought
than by her beauty, the which was exceeding rare. And never did Hector
make sally upon his foes but she would be at his side, and was always
as well to the front as Hector himself in the mêlée, wherever the
fight was hottest. In such wise that ’tis said she did several times
accomplish such deeds of daring and so stir the Trojan’s wonder as
that he would stop short as if astonished in the midst of the fiercest
combats, and so withdraw somewhat on one side, the better to see and
admire this most valiant Queen doing such gallant deeds.

Thereafter, we leave the world to suppose what was the issue of their
love, and if they did put the same in practise; and truly the result
could not long be doubtful. But any way, their pleasure was to be of
no great duration for the Queen, the better to delight her lover, did
so constantly rush forth to confront all hazards, that she was slain
at last in one of the fiercest and fellest encounters. Others however
say she did never see Hector at all, but that he was dead before
her arrival. So coming on the scene and learning his death, she did
thereupon fall into so great grief and such sadness to have lost the
goodly sight she had so fondly desired and had come from so far a land
to seek, that she did start forth to meet a voluntary death in the
bloodiest battles of the war; and so she died, having no further cause
to live, now she had failed of beholding the gallant being she had
chosen as best of all and had loved the most.[2]

The like was done by Thalestris, another Queen of the Amazons, who did
traverse a great country and cover I know not how many leagues for to
visit Alexander the Great, and asking it of him as a favour, or as but
a fair exchange of courtesy, did lie with him in order that she might
have issue by him of so noble and generous a blood, having heard him
so high rated of all men. This boon did Alexander very gladly grant
her; and verily he must needs have been sore spoiled and sick of women
if he had done otherwise, for the said Queen was as beautiful as she
was valiant. Quintus Curtius, Orosius and Justin do affirm moreover
that she did thus visit Alexander with three hundred ladies in her
suite, all bearing arms, and all so fair apparelled and of such a
beauteous grace as that naught could surpass the same. So attended, she
did make her reverence before the King, who did welcome her with the
highest marks of honour. And she did tarry thirteen days and thirteen
nights with him, submitting herself in all ways to his good will and
pleasure. At the same time she did frankly tell him how that if she had
a daughter by him, she would guard her as a most priceless treasure;
but an if she had a son, that she would send him back to the King,
by reason of the abhorrence she bear to the male sex, in the matter
of holding rule and exercising any command among them, in accordance
with the laws introduced in their companies after they had slain their
husbands.

Herein need we have no doubt whatever but that the rest of the ladies
and attendant dames did after a like manner, and had themselves covered
by the different captains and men of war of the said King Alexander.
For they were bound in this matter to follow their mistress’ example.

So too the fair maiden Camilla, at once beautiful and noble-hearted,
and one which did serve her mistress Diana right faithfully in the
woodlands and forests on her hunting parties, having heard the bruit of
Turnus’ valiance, and how he had to do with another valiant warrior, to
wit Aeneas, which did press him sore, did choose her side. Then did she
seek out her favourite and join him, but with three very honourable and
fair ladies beside for her comrades, the which she had taken for her
close friends and trusty confidantes,—and for tribads too mayhap, and
for mutual naughtiness. And so did she hold these same in honour and
use them on all occasions, as Virgil doth describe in his _Æneid_. And
they were called the one Armia, a virgin and a valiant maid, another
Tullia, and the third Tarpeia, which was skilled to wield the pike and
dart, and that in two divers fashions, be it understood,—all three
being daughters of Italy.[3*]

Thus then did Camilla arrive with her beauteous little band (as they
say “little and good”) for to seek out Turnus, with whom she did
perform sundry excellent feats of arms; and did sally forth so oft
and join battle with the doughty Trojans that she was presently slain,
to the very sore grief of Turnus, who did regard her most highly, as
well for her beauty as for the good succour she brought. In such wise
did these fair and courageous dames seek out brave and valiant heroes,
succouring the same in their ways and encounters.

What else was it did fill the breast of poor Dido with the flame of
so ardent a love, what but the valiance she did feel to be in her
Aeneas,—if we are to credit Virgil? For she had begged him to tell her
of his wars, and the ruin and destruction of Troy, and he had gratified
her wish,—albeit to his own great grief, to renew the memory of such
sorrows, and in his discourse had dwelt by the way on his own valiant
achievements. And Dido having well marked all these and pondered them
in her breast, and presently declaring of her love to her sister Anna,
the chiefest and most pregnant of the words she said to her were these
and no other: “Ah! sister mine, what a guest is this which hath come to
my Court! Oh! the noble way he hath with him, and how his very carriage
doth announce him a brave and most valiant warrior, in deed and in
spirit! I do firmly believe him to be the offspring of some race of
gods; for churlish hearts are ever cowardly of their very nature.” Such
were Dido’s words; and I think she did come to love him so, quite as
much because she was herself brave and generous-hearted, and that her
instinct did push her to love her fellow, as to win help and service
of him in case of need. But the wretch did deceive and desert her in
pitiful wise,—an ill deed he should never have done to so honourable a
lady, which had given him her heart and her love, to him, I say, that
was but a stranger and an outlaw.

Boccaccio in his book of _Famous Folk which have been Unfortunate_,[4]
doth tell a tale of a certain Duchess of Forli, named Romilda, who
having lost husband and lands and goods, all which Caucan, King of the
Avarese, had robbed her of, was constrained to take refuge with her
children in her castle of Forli, and was therein besieged by him. But
one day when he did approach near the walls to make a reconnaissance,
Romilda who was on the top of a tower, saw him and did long and
carefully observe him. Then seeing him so handsome, being in the flower
of his age, mounted on a fine horse and clad in a magnificent suit of
mail, and knowing how he was used to do many doughty deeds of war,
and that he did never spare himself any more than the least of his
soldiers, she did incontinently fall deeply enamoured of the man, and
quitting to mourn for her husband and all care for her castle and the
siege thereof, did send him word by a messenger that, if he would have
her in marriage, she would yield him up the place on the day their
wedding should be celebrated.

King Caucan took her at her word. Accordingly the day agreed upon being
come, lo! she doth deck herself most stately as a duchess should in
her finest and most magnificent attire, which did make her yet fairer
still to look on, exceeding fair as she was by nature. So having come
to the King’s camp for to consummate the marriage, this last, to the
end he might not be blamed as not having kept his word, did spend
all that night in satisfying the enamoured duchess’s desires. But
the next morning, on rising, he did have a dozen Averese soldiers of
his called, such as he deemed to be the strongest and most stalwart
fellows, and gave Romilda into their hands, to take their pleasure of
her one after other. These did have her for all a night long so oft
as ever they could. But then, when day was come again, Caucan having
summoned her before him, and after sternly upbraiding her for her
wantonness and heaping many insults upon her, did have her impaled
through her belly, of which cruel treatment she did presently die.
Truly a savage and barbarous act, so to mishandle a fair and honourable
lady, instead of displaying gratitude, rewarding her and treating her
with all possible courtesy, for the good opinion she had showed of his
generosity, valour and noble courage, and her love for him therefor!
And of this must fair ladies sometimes have good heed; for of these
valiant men of war there be some which have so grown accustomed to
killing and slashing and savagely plying the steel, that now and again
it doth take their humour to exercise the like barbarity on women. Yet
are not all of this complexion, but rather, when honourable ladies do
them this honour to love them and hold their valour in high esteem,
they do leave behind in camp their fury and fierce passions, and in
court and ladies’ chambers do fit themselves to the practise of all
gentleness and kindness and fair courtesy.

Bandello in his _Tragic Histories_[5] doth relate one, the finest story
I have ever read, of a certain Duchess of Savoy, who one day coming
forth from her good town of Turin, did hear a Spanish woman, a pilgrim
on her road to Loretto to perform a vow, cry out and admire her beauty
and loudly declare, how that if only so fair and perfect a lady were
wedded to her brother, the Señor de Mendoza, which was himself so
handsome, brave and valiant, folk might well say in all lands that now
the finest and handsomest couple in all the world were mated together.
The Duchess who did very well understand the Spanish tongue, having
graven these words in her breast and pondered them over in her heart,
did anon begin to grave love in the same place likewise. In such wise
that by this report of his merits she did fall so passionately in
love with the Señor de Mendoza as that she did never slacken till she
had planned a pretended pilgrimage to St. James of Compostella, for
to see the man for whom she had so suddenly been smit with love. So
having journeyed to Spain, and taken the road passing by the house of
de Mendoza, she had time and leisure to content and satisfy her eyes
with a good sight of the fair object she had chosen. For the Señor de
Mendoza’s sister, which was in the Duchess’ train, had advised her
brother of so distinguished and fair a visitor’s coming. Wherefore he
did not fail to go forth to meet her in gallant array, and mounted on a
noble Spanish horse, and this with so fine a grace as that the Duchess
could not but be assured of the truth of the fair report which had been
given her, and did admire him greatly, as well for his handsome person
as for his noble carriage, which did plainly manifest the valiance that
was in him. This she did esteem even more highly than all his other
merits, accomplishments and perfections, presaging even at that date
how she would one day mayhap have need of his valour,—as truly in after
times he did excellently serve her under the false accusation which
Count Pancalier brought against her chastity. Natheless, though she did
find him brave and courageous as a man of arms, yet for the nonce was
he a recreant in love; for he did show himself so cold and respectful
toward her as to try never an assault of amorous words, the very thing
she did most desire, and for which she had undertook her journey.
Wherefore, in sore despite at so chilling a respect, or to speak
plainly such recreancy in love, she did part from him on the morrow,
not near so well content as she had come.

Thus we see how true ’tis that ladies do sometimes love men no less
which are bold in love than they which be brave in arms,—not that they
would have them brazen and over-bold, impudent and self-satisfied, as I
have known some to be. But in this matter must they keep ever the _via
media_.

I have known not a few which have lost many a good fortune with women
by reason of such over-respectfulness, whereof I could tell some
excellent stories, were I not afeared of wandering too far from the
proper subject of my Discourse. But I hope to give them in a separate
place; so I will only tell the following one here.

I have heard tell in former days of a lady, and one of the fairest in
all the world, who having in the like fashion heard a certain Prince
given out by repute for brave and valiant, and that he had already
in his young days done and performed great exploits of war, and in
especial won two great and signal victories against his foes,[6] did
conceive a strong desire to see him; and to this end did make a journey
to the province wherein he was then tarrying, under some pretext or
other that I need not name. Well! at last she did set forth; and
presently,—for what is not possible to a brave and loving heart?—she
doth gain sight of him and can contemplate him at her ease, for he
did come out a long distance to meet her, and doth now receive her
with all possible honour and respect, as was meet for so great, fair
and noble-hearted a Princess. Nay! the respect was e’en _too_ great,
some do say; for the same thing happened as with the Señor de Mendoza
and the Duchess of Savoy, and such excessive respectfulness did but
engender the like despite and dissatisfaction. At any rate she did part
from him by no means so well satisfied as she had come. It may well
be he would but have wasted his time without her yielding one whit to
his wishes; but at the least the attempt would not have been ill, but
rather becoming to a gallant man, and folk would have esteemed him the
better therefor.

Why! what is the use of a bold and generous spirit, if it show not
itself in all things, as well in love as in war? For love and arms be
comrades, and do go side by side with a single heart, as saith the
Latin poet: “Every lover is a man of war, and Cupid hath his camp and
arms no less than Mars.” Ronsard hath writ a fine sonnet hereanent in
the first book of his “Amours.”[7*]


                                  2.

However to return to the fainness women do display to see and love
great-hearted and valiant men,—I have heard it told of the Queen of
England, Elizabeth, the same which is yet reigning at this hour, how
that one day being at table, entertaining at supper the Grand Prior
of France, a nobleman of the house of Lorraine, and M. d’Anville,
now M. de Montmorency and Constable of France, the table discourse
having fallen among divers other matters on the merits of the late
King Henri II. of France, she did commend that Prince most highly, for
that he was so brave, and to use her own word so _martial_ a monarch,
as he had manifested plainly in all his doings. For which cause she
had resolved, an if he had not died so early, to go visit him in his
Kingdom, and had actually had her galleys prepared and made ready for
to cross over into France, and so the twain clasp hands and pledge
their faith and peaceable intent. “In fact ’twas one of my strongest
wishes to see this hero. I scarce think he would have refused me, for,”
she did declare, “my humour is to love men of courage. And I do sore
begrudge death his having snatched away so gallant a King, at any rate
before I had looked on his face.”

This same Queen, some while after, having heard great renown of the
Duc de Nemours for the high qualities and valour that were in him,
was most eager to enquire news of him from the late deceased M. de
Rendan[8] at the time when King Francis II did send him to Scotland to
conclude a peace under the walls of Leith,[8] which was then besieged
by the English. And so soon as he had told the Queen at length all the
particulars of that nobleman’s high and noble deeds and merits and
points of gallantry, M. de Rendan, who was no less understanding in
matters of love than of arms, did note in her and in her countenance a
certain sparkle of love or at the least liking, as well as in her words
a very strong desire to see him. Wherefore, fain not to stay her in so
excellent a path, he did what he could to find out from her whether, if
the Duke should come to see her, he would be welcome and well received.
She did assure him this would certainly be so, from which he did
conclude they might very well come to be wed.

Presently being returned to the Court of France from off his embassy,
he did report all the discourse to the King and M. de Nemours.
Whereupon the former did command and urge M. de Nemours to agree to
the thing. This he did with very great alacrity, if he could come into
so fine a Kingdom[9*] by the means of so fair, so virtuous and noble a
Queen.

As a result the irons were soon in the fire. With the good means the
King did put in his hands, the Duke did presently make very great and
magnificent preparations and equipments, both of raiment, horses and
arms, and in fact of all costly and beautiful things, without omitting
aught needful (for myself did see all this) to go and appear before
this fair Princess, above all forgetting not to carry thither with him
all the flower of the young nobility of the Court. Indeed Greffier, the
Court fool, remarking thereupon did say ’twas wondrous how all the gay
_pease blossom_ of the land was going overseas, pointing by this his
jape at the wild young bloods of the French Court.

Meantime M. de Lignerolles, a gentleman of much adroitness and skill,
and at that time an high favourite with M. de Nemours, his master, was
despatched to the said fair Princess, and anon returned bearing a most
gentle answer and one very meet to content him, and cause him to press
on and further hasten his journey. And I remember me the marriage was
held at Court to be as good as made. Yet did we observe how all of a
sudden the voyage in question was broke off short and never made, and
this in spite of a very great expenditure thereon, now all vain and
useless.

Myself could say as well as any man in France what ’twas did lead to
this rupture; yet will I remark thus much only in passing:—It may well
be other loves did more move his heart, and held him more firm a
captive. For truly he was so accomplished in all ways and so skilful in
arms and all good exercises, as that ladies did vie with each other in
running after him. So I have seen some of the most high-spirited and
virtuous women which were ready enough to break their fast of chastity
for him.

We have, in the _Cent Nouvelles_ of Queen Marguerite of Navarre, a
very excellent tale of that lady of Milan,[10*] which having given
assignation to the late M. de Bonnivet, since that day Admiral of
France, one night, did charge her chamber-women to stand with drawn
swords in hand and to make a disturbance on the steps, just as he
should be ready to go to bed. This they did to great effect, following
therein their mistress’ orders, which for her part did feign to be
terrified and sore afraid, crying out ’twas her husband’s brothers
which had noted something amiss, and that she was undone, and that he
should hide under the bed or behind the arras. But M. de Bonnivet,
without the least panic, taking his cloak round the one arm and his
sword in the other hand, said only: “Well, well! where be they, these
doughty brothers, which would fright me or do me hurt? Soon as they
shall see me, they will not so much as dare look at the point of my
sword.” So saying, he did throw open the door and sally forth, but as
he was for charging down the steps, lo! he did find only the women and
their silly noise, which were sore scared at sight of him and began to
scream and confess the whole truth. M. de Bonnivet, seeing what was
toward, did straight leave the jades, commending them to the devil, and
hying him back to the bedchamber, shutteth to the door behind him. Thus
did he betake him to his lady once more, which did then fall a-laughing
and a-kissing of him, confessing how ’twas naught but a trick of her
contriving, and declaring, an if he had played the poltroon and had not
shown his valiance, whereof he had the repute, that he should never
have lain with her. But seeing he had proved him so bold and confident
of heart, she did therefore kiss him and frankly welcome him to her
bed. And all night long ’twere better not to enquire too close what
they did; for indeed she was one of the fairest women in all Milan, and
one with whom he had had much pains to win her over.

I once knew a gallant gentleman, who one day being at Rome to bed with
a pretty Roman lady, in her husband’s absence, was alarmed in like
wise; for she did cause one of her waiting women to come in hot haste
to warn him the husband was hunting round. The lady, pretending sore
amazement, did beseech the gentleman to hide in a closet, else she was
undone. “No, no!” my friend made answer, “I would not do that for all
the world; but an if he come, why! I will kill him.” With this he did
spring to grasp his sword; but the lady only fell a-laughing, and did
confess how she had arranged it all of set purpose to prove him, to see
what he would do, if her husband did threat him with hurt, and whether
he would make a good defence of his mistress.

I likewise knew a very fair lady, who did quit outright a lover
she had, because she deemed him a coward; and did change him for
another, which did in no way resemble him, but was feared and dreaded
exceedingly for his powers of fence, being one of the best swordsmen to
be found in those days.

I have heard a tale told at Court by the old gossips, of a lady which
was at Court, mistress of the late M. de Lorge,[11] that good soldier
and in his younger days one of the bravest and most renowned captains
of foot men of his time. She having heard so much praise given to his
valour, was fain, one day that King Francis the First was showing a
fight of lions at his Court, to prove him whether he was so brave as
folk made out. Wherefore she did drop one of her gloves in the lions’
den, whenas they were at their fiercest; and with that did pray M. de
Lorge to go get it for her, an if his love of her were as great as he
was forever saying. He without any show of surprise, doth take his
cloak on fist and his sword in the other hand, and so boldly forth
among the lions for to recover the glove. In this emprise was fortune
so favourable to him, that seeing he did all through show a good front
and kept the point of his sword boldly presented to the lions, these
did not dare attack him. So after picking up the glove, he did return
toward his mistress and gave it back to her; for the which she and all
the company there present did esteem him very highly. But ’tis said
that out of sheer despite at such treatment, M. de Lorge did quit her
for ever, forasmuch as she had thought good to make her pastime of him
and his valiance in this fashion. Nay! more, they say he did throw the
glove in her face, out of mere despite; for he had rather an hundred
times she had bid him go break up a whole battalion of foot soldiery,
a matter he was duly trained to undertake, than thus to fight beasts,
a contest where glory is scarce to be gained. At any rate suchlike
trials of men’s courage be neither good nor honourable, and they that
do provoke the same are much to be blamed.

I like as little another trick which a certain lady did play her lover.
For when he was offering her his service, assuring her there was never
a thing, be it as perilous as it might, he would not do for her, she
taking him at his word, did reply, “Well! an if you love me so much,
and be as courageous as you say, stab yourself with your dagger in the
arm for the love of me.” The other, who was dying for love of her, did
straight draw his weapon, ready to give himself the blow. However I did
hold his arm and took the dagger from him, remonstrating and saying he
would be a great fool to go about it in any such fashion to prove his
love and courage. I will not name the lady; but the gentleman concerned
was the late deceased M. de Clermont-Tallard the elder,[12*] which
fell at the battle of Montcontour, one of the bravest and most valiant
gentlemen of France, as he did show by his death, when in command of a
company of men-at-arms,—a man I did love and honour greatly.

I have heard say a like thing did once happen to the late M. de Genlis,
the same which fell in Germany, leading the Huguenot troops in the
third of our wars of Religion. For crossing the Seine one day in front
of the Louvre with his mistress, she did let fall her handkerchief,
which was a rich and beautiful one, into the water on purpose, and told
him to leap into the river to recover the same. He, knowing not how to
swim but like a stone, was fain to be excused; but she upbraiding him
and saying he was a recreant lover, and no brave man, without a word
more he did throw himself headlong into the stream, and thinking to get
the handkerchief, would assuredly have been drowned, had he not been
promptly rescued by a boat.

Myself believe that suchlike women, by such trials, do desire in this
wise gracefully to be rid of their lovers, which mayhap do weary them.
’Twere much better did they give them good favours once for all
and pray them, for the love they bear them, to carry these forth to
honourable and perilous places in the wars, and so prove their valour.
Thus would they push them on to greater prowess, rather than make them
perform the follies I have just spoke of, and of which I could recount
an infinity of instances.

This doth remind me, how that, whenas we were advancing to lay siege to
Rouen in the first war of Religion, Mademoiselle de Piennes,[13*] one
of the honourable damsels of the Court, being in doubt as to whether
the late M. de Gergeay was valiant enough to have killed, himself
alone and man to man, the late deceased Baron d’Ingrande, which was
one of the most valiant gentlemen of the Court, did for to prove his
valiance, give him a favour,—a scarf which he did affix to his head
harness. Then, on occasion of the making a reconnaissance of the Fort
of St. Catherine, he did charge so boldly and valiantly on a troop
of horse which had sallied forth of the city, that bravely fighting
he did receive a pistol shot in the head, whereof he did fall stark
dead on the spot. In this wise was the said damsel fully satisfied of
his valour, and had he not been thus killed, seeing he had fought so
well, she would have wedded him; but doubting somewhat his courage,
and deeming he had slain the aforesaid Baron unfairly, for so she did
suspect, she was fain, as she said, to make this visible trial of him.
And verily, although there be many men naturally courageous, yet do the
ladies push the same on to greater prowess; while if they be cold and
cowardly, they do move them to some gallantry and warm them up to some
show of fight.

We have an excellent example hereof in the beautiful Agnes Sorel,[14]
who seeing the King of France Charles VII.[14] deep in love with her,
and recking of naught but to pleasure her, and slack and cowardly
take no heed for his kingdom, did say to him one day, how that when
she was a child, an astrologer had predicted she would be loved and
served of one of the most valiant and courageous kings of Christendom.
Accordingly, whenas the King did her the honour to love her, she did
think he was the valorous monarch which had been predicted for her; but
seeing him so slack, with so little care of his proper business, she
did plainly perceive she was deceived in this, and that the courageous
King intended was not he at all, but the King of England,[14] which did
perform such fine feats of war, and did take so many of his fairest
cities from under his very nose. “Wherefore,” she said to her lover,
“I am away to find him, for of a surety ’tis he the astrologer did
intend.” These words did so sorely prick the King’s heart, as that he
fell a-weeping; and thenceforward, plucking up spirit and quitting his
hunting and his gardens, he did take the bit in his teeth,—and this to
such good effect that by dint of good hap and his own valiance he did
drive the English forth of his Kingdom altogether.

Bertrand du Guesclin[14] having wedded his wife Madame Tiphaine, did
set himself all to pleasure her and so did neglect the management of
the War, he who had been so forward therein afore, and had won him
such praise and glory. But she did upbraid him with this remonstrance,
how that before their marriage folk did speak of naught but him and
his gallant deeds, but henceforth she might well be reproached for
the discontinuance of her husband’s fair deeds and good repute. This
she said was a very great disgrace to her and him, that he had now
grown such a stay-at-home; and did never cease her chiding, till she
had roused in him his erstwhile spirit, and sent him back to the wars,
where he did even doughtier deeds than aforetime.

Thus do we see how this honourable lady did not love so much her
night’s pleasures as she did value the honour of her husband. And of
a surety our wives themselves, though they do find us near by their
side, yet an if we be not brave and valiant, will never really love
us nor keep us by them of good and willing heart; whereas when we be
returned from the wars and have done some fine and noble exploit, then
they do verily and indeed love us and embrace of right good will, and
themselves find the enjoyment most precious.

The fourth daughter of the Comte de Provence,[15*] father-in-law of
St. Louis, and herself wife to Charles, Count of Anjou, brother of the
said King, being sore vexed, high-spirited and ambitious Princess as
she was, at being but plain Countess of Anjou and Provence, and because
she alone of her three sisters, of whom two were Queens and the third
Empress, did bear no better title than that my Lady and Countess, did
never cease till she had prayed, beseeched and importuned her husband
to conquer and get some Kingdom for himself. And they did contrive
so well as that they were chose of Pope Urban to be King and Queen
of the Two Sicilies; and they did away, the twain of them, to Rome
with thirty galleys to be crowned by his Holiness, with all state and
splendour, King and Queen of Jerusalem and Naples, which dominion he
did win afterward, no less by his victorious arms than by the aid his
wife afforded him, selling all her rings and jewels for to provide the
expenses of the war. So thereafter did they twain reign long and not
unpeaceably in the fine kingdoms they had gotten.

Long years after, one of their grand-daughters, issue of them and
theirs, Ysabeau de Lorraine to wit,[16*] without help of her husband
René, did carry out a like emprise. For while her husband was prisoner
in the hands of Charles, Duke of Burgundy, she being a Princess of a
wise prudence and high heart and courage, the Kingdom of Sicily and
Naples having meantime fallen to them in due succession, did assemble
an army of thirty thousand men. This she did lead forth in person, and
so conquer all the Kingdom and take possession of Naples.


                                  3.

I could name an host of ladies which have in suchlike ways done great
and good service to their husbands, and how being high of heart and
ambition they have pushed on and encouraged their mates to court
fortune, and to win goods and grandeur and much wealth. And truly ’tis
the most noble and most honourable fashion of getting of such things,
thus at the sword’s point.

I have known many men in this our land of France and at our Courts,
which really more by the urging of their wives than by any will of
their own, have undertaken and accomplished gallant exploits.

Many women on the other hand have I known, which thinking only of their
own good pleasures, have stood in their husbands’ way and kept the same
ever by their side, hindering them of doing noble deeds, unwilling to
have them find amusement in aught else but in contenting them at the
game of Venus, so keen were they after this sport. I could tell many
a tale hereof, but I should be going too far astray from my subject,
which is a worthier one for sure, seeing it doth handle virtue, than
the other, which hath to do with vice. ’Tis more pleasant by far to
hear tell of such ladies as have pushed on their men to noble deeds.
Nor do I speak solely of married women, but of many others beside,
which by dint of one little favour bestowed, have made their lovers to
do many a fine thing they had never done else. For what a satisfaction
is theirs! what incitement and warming of heart is greater than when
at the wars a man doth think how he is well loved of his mistress, and
if only he do some fine thing for the love of her, what kind looks and
pretty ways, what fair glances, what kissings, delights and joys, he
may hope after to receive of her?

Scipio amongst other rebukes he did administer to Massinissa, when,
all but bloody yet from battle, he did wed Sophonisba, said to him:
how that ’twas ill-becoming to think of ladies and the love of ladies,
when at the wars. He must pardon me here, an if he will; but for my own
part, I ween there is no such great contentment, nor one that giveth
more courage and emulation to do nobly than they. I have travelled in
that country myself in old days. And not only I, but all such, I do
firmly believe, as take the field and fight, do find the same; and
to them I make appeal. I am sure they be all of my opinion, be they
who they may, and that whenas they are embarked on some good warlike
emprise, and presently find themselves in the heat of battle and press
of the foe, their heart doth swell within them as they think on their
ladies, the favours they do carry of them, and the caresses and gentle
welcome they will receive of the same after the war is done, if they
but escape,—and if they come to die, the sore grief they will feel for
love of them and thought of their end. In a word, for the love of their
ladies and fond thoughts of them, all emprises be facile and easy,
the sternest fights be but merry tourneys to them, and death itself a
triumph.

I do remember me how at the battle of Dreux the late M. des
Bordes,[17*] a brave and gentle knight if ever there was one in his
day, being Lieutenant under M. de Nevers, known at the first as the
Comte d’Eu, a most excellent Prince and soldier, when he had to charge
to break up a battalion of foot which was marching straight on the
advanced guard where was the late M. de Guise the Great, and the signal
to charge was given, the said Des Bordes, mounted on a grey barb, doth
start forward instantly, adorned and garnished with a very fine favour
his mistress had given him (I will not name her, but she was one of the
fair and honourable damsels and great ladies of the Court), and as he
gave rein, he did cry: “Ha! I am away to fight valiantly for the love
of my mistress, or to die for her!” And this boast he failed not to
fulfil; for after piercing the six first ranks, he fell at the seventh,
borne down to earth. Now tell me if this lady had not well used her
favour, and if she had aught to reproach her with for having bestowed
it on him!

M. de Bussi again was a young soldier which did as great honour to
his mistresses’ favours as any man of his time, yea! and the favours
of some I know of, which did merit more stricken fields and deeds of
daring and good sword thrusts than did ever the fair Angelica of the
Paladins and Knights of yore, whether Christian or Saracen. Yet have
I heard him often declare that in all the single combats and wars and
general rencounters (for he hath fought in many such) where he hath
ever been engaged, ’twas not so much for the service of his Prince nor
yet for love of success as for the sole honour and glory of contenting
his lady love. He was surely right in this, for verily all the success
in the world and all its ambitions be little worth in comparison of the
love and kindness of a fair and honourable lady and mistress.

And why else have so many brave Knights errant of the Round Table and
so many valorous Paladins of France in olden time undertaken so many
wars and far journeyings, and gone forth on such gallant emprises, if
not for the love of the fair ladies they did serve or were fain to
serve? I do appeal to our Paladins of France, our Rolands, Renauds,
Ogiers, our Olivers, Yvons and Richards, and an host of others. And
truly ’twas a good time and a lucky; for if they did accomplish some
gallant deed for love of their ladies, these same fair ladies, in no
wise ingrate, knew well how to reward them, whenas they hied them back
to meet them, or mayhap would give them tryst there, in the forests and
woodlands, or near some fair fountain or amid the green meadows. And is
not this the guerdon of his doughtiness a soldier most doth crave of
his lady love?

Well! it yet remains to ask, why women do so love these men of
valiance? First, as I did say at the beginning, valour hath in it a
certain force and overmastering power to make itself loved of its
opposite. Then beside, there is a kind of natural inclination doth
exist, constraining women to love great-heartedness, which to be sure
is an hundred times more lovable than cowardice,—even as virtue is
alway more to be desired than vice.

Some ladies there be which do love men thus gifted with valour, because
they imagine that just as they be brave and expert at arms and in the
trade of War, they must be the same at that of Love.

And this rule doth hold really good with some. ’Twas fulfilled for
instance by Cæsar, that champion of the world, and many another gallant
soldier I have known, though I name no names. And such lovers do
possess a very different sort of vigour and charm from rustics and folk
of any other profession but that of arms, so much so that one push of
these same gallants is worth four of ordinary folk. When I say this,
I do mean in the eyes of women moderately lustful, not of such as be
inordinately so, for the mere number is what pleaseth this latter sort.
But if this rule doth hold good sometimes in some of these warlike
fellows, and according to the humour of some women, it doth fail in
others; for some of these valiant soldiers there be so broken down by
the burden of their harness and the heavy tasks of war, that they have
no strength left when they have to come to this gentle game of love, in
such wise that they cannot content their ladies,—of whom some (and many
are of such complexion), had liever have one good workman at Venus’
trade, fresh and ground to a good point, than four of these sons of
Mars, thus broken-winged.

I have known many of the sex of this sort and this humour; for after
all, they say, the great thing is to pass one’s time merrily, and get
the quintessence of enjoyment out of it, without any special choice of
persons. A good man of war is good, and a fine sight on the field of
battle; but an if he can do naught a-bed, they declare, a good stout
lackey, in good case and practice, is every whit as worth having as a
handsome and valiant gentleman,—tired out.

I do refer me to such dames as have made trial thereof, and do so every
day; for the gallant soldier’s loins, be he as brave and valiant as he
may, being broken and chafed of the harness they have so long carried
on them, cannot afford the needful supply, as other men do, which have
never borne hardship or fatigue.

Other ladies there be which do love brave men, whether it be for
husbands or for lovers, to the end these may show good fight and so
better defend their honour and chastity, if any detractors should be
fain to befoul these with ill words. Several such I have seen at Court,
where I knew in former days a very great and a very fair lady[18] whose
name I had rather not give, who being much subject to evil tongues, did
quit a lover, and a very favourite one, she had, seeing him backward to
come to blows and pick a quarrel and fight it out, to take another[18]
instead which was a mettlesome wight, a brave and valiant soul, which
would gallantly bear his lady’s honour on the point of his sword,
without ever a man daring to touch the same in any wise.

Many ladies have I known in my time of this humour, wishful always to
have a brave gallant for their escort and defence. This no doubt is
a good and very useful thing oftentimes for them; but then they must
take good heed not to stumble or let their heart change toward them,
once they have submitted to their domination. For if these fellows do
note the least in the world of their pranks and fickle changes, they do
lead them a fine life and rebuke them in terrible wise, both them and
their new gallants, if ever they change. Of this I have seen not a few
examples in the course of my life.

Thus do we see how suchlike women, those that will fain have at command
suchlike brave and mettlesome lovers, must needs themselves be brave
and very faithful in their dealings with the same, or at any rate so
secret in their intrigues as that they may never be discovered. Unless
indeed they do compass the thing by some arrangement, as do the Italian
and Roman courtesans, who are fain ever to have a _bravo_ (this is the
name they give him) to defend and keep them in countenance; but ’tis
always part of the bargain that they shall have other favoured swains
as well, and the bravo shall never say one word.

This is mighty well for the courtesans of Rome and their bravos, but
not for the gallant gentlemen of France and other lands. But an if an
honourable dame is ready to keep herself in all firmness and constancy,
her lover is bound to spare his life in no way for to maintain and
defend her honour, if she do run the very smallest risk of hurt,
whether to her life or her reputation, or of some ill word of scandal.
So have I seen at our own Court several which have made evil tattlers
to hold their tongues at a moment’s notice, when these had started some
detraction of their ladies or mistresses. For by devoir of knighthood
and its laws we be bound to serve as their champions in any trouble, as
did the brave Renaud for the fair Ginevra in Scotland,[19] the Señor
de Mendoza for the beautiful Duchess I have spoke of above, and the
Seigneur de Carouge for his own wedded wife in the days of King Charles
VI., as we do read in our Chronicles. I could quote an host of other
instances, as well of old as of modern times, to say naught of those I
have witnessed at our own Court; but I should never have done.

Other ladies I have known which have quitted cowardly fellows, albeit
these were very rich, to love and wed gentlemen that did possess naught
at all but sword and cloak, so to say. But then they were valorous and
great-hearted, and had hopes, by dint of their valiance and bravery, to
attain to rank and high estate. Though truly ’tis not the bravest that
do most oft win these prizes; but they do rather suffer sore wrong,
while many a time we behold the cowardly and fainthearted succeed
instead. Yet be this as it may, such fortune doth never become these so
well as it doth the men of valour.

But there, I should never get me done, were I to recount at length the
divers causes and reasons why women do so love men of high heart and
courage. I am quite sure, were I set on amplifying this Discourse with
all the host of reasons and examples I might, I could make a whole book
of it alone. However, as I wish not to tarry over one subject only, so
much as to deal with various and divers matters, I will be satisfied
to have said what I have said,—albeit sundry will likely blame me, how
that such and such a point was surely worthy of being enriched by more
instances and a string of prolix reasons, which themselves could very
well supply, exclaiming, “Why! he hath clean forgot this; he hath clean
forgot that.” I know my subject well enough for all that; and mayhap
I know more instances than ever they could adduce, and more startling
and private. But I prefer not to divulge them all, and not to give the
names.

This is why I do hold my tongue. Yet, before making an end, I will add
this further word by the way. Just as ladies do love men which be
valiant and bold under arms, so likewise do they love such as be of
like sort in love; and the man which is cowardly and over and above
respectful toward them, will never win their good favour. Not that they
would have them so overweening, bold and presumptuous, as that they
should by main force lay them on the floor; but rather they desire
in them a certain hardy modesty, or perhaps better a certain modest
hardihood. For while themselves are not exactly wantons, and will
neither solicit a man nor yet actually offer their favours, yet do they
know well how to rouse the appetites and passions, and prettily allure
to the skirmish in such wise that he which doth not take occasion by
the forelock and join encounter, and that without the least awe of rank
and greatness, without a scruple of conscience or a fear or any sort
of hesitation, he verily is a fool and a spiritless poltroon, and one
which doth merit to be forever abandoned of kind fortune.[20*]

I have heard of two honourable gentlemen and comrades, for the which
two very honourable ladies, and of by no means humble quality, made
tryst one day at Paris to go walking in a garden. Being come thither,
each lady did separate apart one from the other, each alone with her
own cavalier, each in a several alley of the garden, that was so close
covered in with a fair trellis of boughs as that daylight could really
scarce penetrate there at all, and the coolness of the place was very
grateful. Now one of the twain was a bold man, and well knowing how
the party had been made for something else than merely to walk and
take the air, and judging by his lady’s face, which he saw to be all
a-fire, that she had longings to taste other fare than the muscatels
that hung on the trellis, as also by her hot, wanton and wild speech,
he did promptly seize on so fair an opportunity. So catching hold of
her without the least ceremony, he did lay her on a little couch that
was there made of turf and clods of earth, and did very pleasantly work
his will of her, without her ever uttering a word but only: “Heavens!
Sir, what are you at? Surely you be the maddest and strangest fellow
ever was! If anyone comes, whatever will they say? Great heavens!
get out!” But the gentleman, without disturbing himself, did so well
continue what he had begun that he did finish, and she to boot, with
such content as that after taking three or four turns up and down
the alley, they did presently start afresh. Anon, coming forth into
another, open, alley, they did see in another part of the garden the
other pair, who were walking about together just as they had left them
at first. Whereupon the lady, well content, did say to the gentleman in
the like condition, “I verily believe so and so hath played the silly
prude, and hath given his lady no other entertainment but only words,
fine speeches and promenading.”

Afterward when all four were come together, the two ladies did fall to
asking one another how it had fared with each. Then the one which was
well content did reply she was exceeding well, indeed she was; indeed
for the nonce she could scarce be better. The other, which was ill
content, did declare for her part she had had to do with the biggest
fool and most coward lover she had ever seen; and all the time the two
gentlemen could see them laughing together as they walked and crying
out: “Oh! the silly fool! the shamefaced poltroon and coward!” At this
the successful gallant said to his companion: “Hark to our ladies,
which do cry out at you, and mock you sore. You will find you have
overplayed the prude and coxcomb this bout.” So much he did allow; but
there was no more time to remedy his error, for opportunity gave him no
other handle to seize her by. Natheless, now recognizing his mistake,
after some while he did repair the same by certain other means which I
could tell, an if I would.

Again I knew once two great Lords, brothers, both of them highly bred
and highly accomplished gentlemen[21] which did love two ladies, but
the one of these was of much higher quality and more account than the
other in all respects. Now being entered both into the chamber of
this great lady, who for the time being was keeping her bed, each did
withdraw apart for to entertain his mistress. The one did converse with
the high-born dame with every possible respect and humble salutation
and kissing of hands, with words of honour and stately compliment,
without making ever an attempt to come near and try to force the place.
The other brother, without any ceremony of words or fine phrases, did
take his fair one to a recessed window, and incontinently making free
with her (for he was very strong), he did soon show her ’twas not his
way to love _à l’espagnole_, with eyes and tricks of face and words,
but in the genuine fashion and proper mode every true lover should
desire. Presently having finished his task, he doth quit the chamber;
but as he goes, saith to his brother, loud enough for his lady to hear
the words: “Do you as I have done, brother mine; else you do naught
at all. Be you as brave and hardy as you will elsewhere, yet if you
show not your hardihood here and now, you are disgraced; for here is
no place of ceremony and respect, but one where you do see your lady
before you, which doth but wait your attack.” So with this he did leave
his brother, which yet for that while did refrain him and put it off
to another time. But for this the lady did by no means esteem him more
highly, whether it was she did put it down to an over chilliness in
love, or a lack of courage, or a defect of bodily vigour. And still he
had shown prowess enough elsewhere, both in war and love.

The late deceased Queen Mother did one day cause to be played, for
a Shrove Tuesday interlude, at Paris at the Hôtel de Reims, a very
excellent Comedy which Cornelio Fiasco, Captain of the Royal Galleys,
had devised. All the Court was present, both men and ladies, and many
folk beside of the city. Amongst other matters, was shown a young man
which had laid hid a whole night long in a very fair lady’s bedchamber,
yet had never laid finger on her. Telling this hap to his friend, the
latter asketh him: _Ch’avete fatto?_ (What did you do?), to which the
other maketh answer: _Niente_ (Nothing). On hearing this, his friend
doth exclaim: _Ah! poltronazzo, senza cuore! non havete fatto niente!
che maldita sia la tua poltronneria!_—“Oh! poltroon and spiritless! you
did nothing! a curse on your poltroonery then!”

The same evening after the playing of this Comedy, as we were assembled
in the Queen’s chamber, and were discoursing of the said play, I did
ask a very fair and honourable lady, whose name I will not give, what
were the finest points she had noted and observed in the Comedy, and
which had most pleased her. She told me quite simply and frankly: The
best point I noted was when his friend did make answer to the young
man called Lucio, who had told him _che non haveva fatto niente_ (that
he had done nothing) in this wise, _Ah poltronazzo! non havete fatto
niente! che maldita sia la tua poltronneria!_—“Oh! you poltroon! you
did nothing! a curse be on your poltroonery!”

So you see how this fair lady which did talk with me was in agreement
with the friend in reprobating his poltroonery, and that she did in
no wise approve of him for having been so slack and unenterprising.
Thereafter she and I did more openly discourse together of the mistakes
men make by not seizing opportunity and taking advantage of the wind
when it bloweth fair, as doth the good mariner.

This bringeth me to yet another tale, which I am fain, diverting and
droll as it is, to mingle among the more serious ones. Well, then! I
have heard it told by an honourable gentleman and a good friend of
mine own, how a lady of his native place, having often shown great
familiarities and special favour to one of her chamber lackeys, which
did only need time and opportunity to come to a point, the said
lackey, neither a prude nor a fool, finding his mistress one morning
half asleep and lying on her bed, turned over away from the wall,
tempted by such a display of beauty and a posture making it so easy
and convenient, she being at the very edge of the bed, he did come up
softly, and alongside the lady. She turning her head saw ’twas her
lackey, which she was fain of; and just as she was, her place occupied
and all, without withdrawing or moving one whit, and neither resisting
nor trying in the very least to shake off the hold he had of her, did
only say to him, turning round her head only and holding still for
fear of losing him, “Ho! ho! Mister prude, and what hath made you so
bold as to do this?” The lackey did answer with all proper respect,
“Madam, shall I leave?”—“That’s not what I said, Mister prude,” the
lady replied, “I ask you, what made you so bold as to put yourself
there?” But the other did ever come back to the same question, “Madam,
shall I stop? if you wish, I will go out,”—and she to repeating again
and again, “That is not what I say, not what I say, Mister prude!” In
fact, the pair of them did make these same replies and repetitions
three or four times over,—which did please the lady far better than if
she had ordered her gallant to stop, when he did ask her. Thus it did
serve her well to stick to her first question without ever a variation,
and the lover in his reply and the repetition thereof. And in this wise
did they continue to lie together for long after, the same rubric being
always repeated as an accompaniment. For ’tis, as men say, the first
batch only, and the first measure of wine, that costs dear.

A good lackey and an enterprising! To such bold fellows we must needs
say in the words of the Italian proverb, _A bravo cazzo mai non manca
favor_.

Well, from all this you learn how that there be many men which are
brave, bold and valiant, as well in arms as in love; others which be
so in arms, but not in love; others again, which be so in love and not
in arms. Of this last sort was that rascally Paris, who indeed had
hardihood and valiance enough to carry off Helen from her poor cuckold
of a husband Menelaus, but not to do battle with him before Troy town.

Moreover this is why the ladies love not old men, nor such as be too
far advanced in years, seeing such be very timid in love and shamefaced
at asking favours. This is not because they have not concupiscence and
desires as great as young men, or even greater, but because they have
not the powers to match. And this is what a Spanish lady meant, which
said once: how that old men did much resemble persons who, whenas they
do behold kings in their magnificence, domination and authority, do
covet exceedingly to be like them, yet would they never dare to make
any attempt against them to dispossess them of their kingdoms and seize
their place. She was used further to say, _Y a penas es nacido el
deseo, cuando se muere luego_,—“Scarce is the desire born, but it dies
straightway.” Thus old men, when they do see fair objects of attack,
dare not take action, _porque los viejos naturalmente son temerosos; y
amor y temor no se caben en un saco_,—“for that old men are naturally
timid; and love and fear do never go well in one pack.” And indeed they
are quite right; for they have arms neither for offence nor defence,
like young folks, which have youth and beauty on their side. So verily,
as saith the poet: naught is unbecoming to youth, do what it will; and
as another hath it: two sorry sights,—an old man-at-arms and an old
lover.


                                  4.

Well! enough hath been said on this subject; so I do here make an end
and speak no more thereof. Only will I add somewhat on another point,
one that is appertinent and belonging as it were to this, to wit:
how just as fair ladies do love brave men, and such as be valorous
and great-hearted, in like wise do men love women brave of heart and
noble-spirited. And as noble-spirited and courageous men be ever more
lovable and admirable than others, so is the like true of illustrious,
noble-hearted and courageous dames,—not that I would have these perform
the deeds of men, nor yet arm and accoutre them like a man,—as I have
seen and known, as well as heard tell of, some which would mount
a-horse-back like a man, carry their pistol at saddle-bow, shoot off
the same, and generally fight like a man.

I could name one famous instance at any rate of a lady which did all
this during the recent Wars of the League.[22*] But truly suchlike
disguisement is an outrage to the sex. Besides its being neither
becoming nor suitable, ’tis not lawful, and doth bring more harm and
ill repute than many do suppose. Thus it did work great hurt to the
gentle Maid of Orleans, who at her trial was sore calumniated on this
very account, and this was in part cause of her sore and piteous
downfall and death. Wherefore such masqueradings do like me not, nor
stir me to any great admiration. Yet do I approve and much esteem a
fair dame which doth make manifest her courageous and valiant spirit,
being in adversity and downright need, by brave, womanly acts that
do show a man’s heart and courage. Without borrowing examples from
the noble-hearted dames of Rome and of Sparta of yore, the which have
excelled herein all other women in the world, there be others plain
enough to be seen before our very eyes; and I do choose rather to
adduce such modern instances belonging to our own day.

The first example I shall give, and in my eyes the finest I know of
is that of those fair, honourable and doughty dames of Sienna, at the
time of the revolt of their city against the intolerable yoke of the
Imperialists (Ghibellines). For after the dispositions had been fixed
for the defence, the women of the city, being set aside therein as not
apt for war like the men, were fain to make a display of their mettle,
and show how that they could do something else than only ply their
female tasks of day and night. So, to bear their part of the work of
defence, they did divide them into three bands or companies; and one
St. Anthony’s day, in the month of January, they did appear in public
led by three of the fairest ladies, and the greatest and best born, of
all the city, in the Great Square of that town (and it is a very noble
one), with their drums and ensigns.

The first was the Signora Forteguerra, clad in violet, her ensign
of the same colour and all her company in like array, her banner
bearing this device: _Pur che sia il vero_ (Let the truth prevail).
Now all these ladies were dressed in the guise of nymphs, with short
skirts which did best discover and display the fine leg beneath. The
second was the Signora Piccolomini, clad in scarlet, and her company
and ensign the same, with a white cross and this device: _Pur che no
l’habbia tutto_ (Let him not have it all). The third was the Signora
Livia Fausta, clad all in white, and her company in white and a white
ensign, whereon was a palm, and for device: _Pur che l’habbia_ (Let him
have it, then!).

Round about and in the train of these three, which did seem very
goddesses, were a good three thousand other women, both gentlewomen,
citizens’ wives and others, all fair to look upon, and all duly clad in
their proper dress and livery, whether of satin, taffety, damask, or
other silken stuff, and each and all firm resolved to live or die for
freedom. Moreover each did carry a fascine on her shoulder for a fort
which was a-building, while all cried out together, _France, France!_
With this spectacle, so rare and delightsome an one, the Cardinal
of Ferrara and M. de Termes, the French King’s Lieutenants, were so
ravished, as that they did find no other pleasure but only in watching,
admiring and commending these same fair and honourable ladies. And
of a truth I have heard many say, both men and women, which were
there present, that never was seen so fine a sight. And God knoweth,
beautiful women be not lacking in this city of Sienna, and that in
abundance, and without picking and choosing.

The men of the city, which of their own wishes were greatly set on
winning their freedom, were yet more encouraged to the same by this
noble display, unwilling to fall below the women in zeal. In such
wise that all did vie with one another, Lords, gentlemen, citizens,
trades-folk, artizans, rich and poor alike, and all did flock to the
fort to imitate the example of these fair, virtuous and honourable
dames. So all in much emulation,—and not laymen alone, but churchmen
to boot,—did join in pushing on the good work. Then, on returning
back from the fort, the men on one side, and the women likewise
ranged in battle array in the great square before the Palace of the
Signoria,[23*] they did advance one after other, and company after
company, to salute the image of the Blessed Virgin, patroness of the
city, singing the while sundry hymns and canticles in her honour, to
airs so soft and with so gracious an harmony that, part of pleasure,
part of pity, tears ’gan fall from the eyes of all the people present.
These after receiving the benediction of the most reverend Cardinal of
Ferrara, did withdraw, each to their own abode,—all the whole folk, men
and women alike, with fixed resolve to do their duty yet better for
the future.

This sacred ceremony of these ladies doth remind me (but without making
comparison ’twixt the two) of a heathen one, yet goodly withal, which
was performed at Rome at the period of the Punic Wars, as we do read in
the Historian Livy.[24*] ’Twas a solemn progress and procession made by
three times nine, which is twenty-seven, young and pretty Roman maids,
all of them virgins, clad in longish frocks, of which history doth not
however tell us the colours. These dainty maids, their solemn march and
procession completed, did then make halt at a certain spot, where they
proceeded to dance a measure before the assembled people, passing from
hand to hand a cord or ribband, ranged all in order one after other,
and stepping a round, accommodating the motion and twinkling of their
feet to the cadence of the tune and the song they sang the while. It
was a right pretty sight to see, no less for the beauty of the maids
than for their sweet grace, their dainty way of dancing and the adroit
tripping of their feet, the which is one of the chiefest charms of a
maid, when she is skilled to move and guide the same daintily and well.

I have oft pictured to myself the measure they did so dance; and it
hath brought to my mind one I have seen performed in my young days
by the girls of mine own countryside, called the “garter.” In this,
the village girls, giving and taking the garter from hand to hand,
would pass and re-pass these above their heads, then entangle and
interlace the same between their legs, leaping nimbly over them, then
unwinding them and slipping free with little, dainty bounds,—all this
while keeping rank one after other, without once losing cadence with
the song or instrument of music which led the measure, in such wise
that the thing was a mighty pretty thing to see. For the little leaps
and bounds they gave, the interlacing and slipping free again, the
wielding of the garter and the graceful carriage of the girls, did all
provoke so dainty a smack of naughtiness, as that I do marvel much
the said dance hath never been practised at Court in these days of
ours. Pleasant ’tis to see the dainty drawers, and the fine leg freely
exhibited in this dance, and which lass hath the best fitting shoe and
the most alluring mien. But truly it can be better appreciated by the
eye than described in words.

But to return to our ladies of Sienna. Ah! fair and valiant dames, you
should surely never die,—you nor your glory, which will be for ever
immortal. So too another fair and gentle maid of your city, who during
its siege, seeing one night her brother kept a prisoner by sickness
in his bed and in very ill case to go on guard, doth leave him there
a-bed and slipping quietly away from his side, doth take his arms and
accoutrements, and so, a very perfect likeness of her brother, maketh
appearance with the watch. Nor was she discovered, but by favour of
the night was really taken for him she did represent. A gentle act, in
truth! for albeit she had donned a man’s dress and arms, yet was it not
to make a constant habit thereof, but for the nonce only to do a good
office for her brother. And indeed ’tis said no love is like that of
brother and sister, and further that in a good cause no risk should be
spared to show a gentle intrepidity of heart, in whatsoever place it be.

I ween the corporal of the guard which was then in command of the
squad in which was this fair girl, when he wist of her act, was sore
vexed he had not better recognized her, so to have published abroad her
merit on the spot, or mayhap to have relieved her of standing sentry,
or else merely to have taken his pleasure in gazing on her beauty and
grace, and her military bearing; for no doubt at all she did study in
all things to counterfeit a soldier’s mien.

Of a surety so fine a deed could scarce be overpraised, and above all
when the occasion was so excellent, and the thing carried out for a
brother’s sake. The like was done by the gentle Richardet, in the
Romance, but for different purpose, when after hearing one evening
his sister Bramante discourse of the beauties of the fair Princess of
Spain, and of her own love and vain desires after her, he did take her
accoutrements and fine frock, after she was to bed, and so disguiseth
himself in the likeness of his sister,—the which he could readily
accomplish, so like they were in face and beauty. Then presently, under
this feigned form he did win from the said lovely Princess what was
denied his sister by reason of her sex. Whereof, however, great hurt
had come to him, but for the favour of Roger, who taking him for his
mistress Bramante, did save him scatheless of death.[25]

Now as to the ladies of Sienna, I have heard it of M. de La Chapelle
des Ursins, which was at that time in Italy, and did make report of
this their gallant exploit to our late King Henri II. of France, how
that this monarch did find the same so noble, that with tears in his
eyes he took an oath, an if one day God should grant him peace or truce
with the Emperor, he would hie him with his galleys across the Tuscan
sea, and so to Sienna, to see this city so well affected to him and
his party, and thank the citizens for their good will and gallantry,
and above all to behold these fair and honourable ladies and give them
especial thanks.

I am sure he would not have failed so to do, for he did highly
honour the said good and noble dames. Accordingly he did write them,
addressing chiefly the three chief leaders, letters the most gracious
possible, full of thanks and compliments, the which did pleasure them
greatly and animate their courage to yet an higher pitch.

Alas! the truce came right enough some while after; but meantime the
city had been taken, as I have described elsewhere. Truly ’twas an
irreparable loss to France to be deprived of so noble and affectionate
an ally, which mindful and conscious of the ties of its ancient origin,
was always fain to join us and take place in our ranks. For they say
these gallant Siennese be sprung from that people of France which in
Gaul they did call the Senones in old times, now known as the folk of
Sens. Moreover they do retain to this day somewhat of the humour of
us Frenchmen; they do very much wear their heart on their sleeve, as
the saying is, and be quick, sudden and keen like us. The Siennese
ladies likewise have much of those pretty ways and charming manners and
graceful familiarities which be the especial mark of Frenchwomen.

I have read in an old Chronicle, which I have cited elsewhere, how
King Charles VIII., on his Naples journey, when he did come to Sienna,
was there welcomed with so magnificent and so triumphal an entry, as
that it did surpass all the others he received in all Italy. They did
even go so far by way of showing greater respect and as a sign of
humbleness, as to take all the city gates from off their hinges and
lay the same flat on the ground; and so long as he did tarry there, the
gates were thus left open and unguarded to all that came and went, then
after, on his departure, set up again as before.

I leave you to imagine if the King, and all his Court and army, had not
ample and sufficient cause to love and honour this city (as indeed he
did always), and to say all possible good thereof. In fact their stay
there was exceeding agreeable to him and to all, and ’twas forbid under
penalty of death to offer any sort of insult, as truly not the very
smallest did ever occur. Ah! gallant folk of Sienna, may ye live for
ever! Would to heaven ye were still ours in all else, as it may well
be, ye are yet in heart and soul! For the overrule of a King of France
is far gentler than that of a Duke of Florence; and besides this, the
kinship of blood can never go for naught. If only we were as near
neighbours as we be actually remote from each other, we might very like
be found at one in will and deed.

In like wise the chiefest ladies of Pavia, at the siege of that town by
King Francis I. of France, following the lead and example of the noble
Countess Hippolita de Malespina, their generalissima, did set them to
carrying of the earth-baskets, shifting soil and repairing the breaches
in their walls, vying with the soldiery in their activity.

Conduct like that of the Siennese dames I have just told of, myself
did behold on the part of certain ladies of La Rochelle,[26] at the
siege of their town. And I remember me how on the first Sunday of Lent
during the siege, the King’s brother, our General, did summon M. de la
Noue to come before him on his parole, and speak with him and give
account of the negotiations he had charged him withal on behalf of the
said city,—all the tale whereof is long and most curious, as I do hope
elsewhere to describe the same. M. de la Noue failed not to appear, to
which end M. d’Estrozze was given as an hostage on the town, and truce
was made for that day and for the next following.[27*]

This truce once concluded, there did appear immediately, as on our side
we too did show us outside our trenches, many of the towns-folk on the
ramparts and walls. And notable over all were seen an hundred or so of
noble ladies and citizens’ wives and daughters, the greatest, richest
and fairest of all the town, all clad in white, the dress, which did
cover head as well as body, being all of fine white Holland linen,
that ’twas a very fair sight to see. And they had adopted this dress
by reason of the fortification of the ramparts at which they were at
work, whether carrying of the earth-baskets or moving the soil. Now
other garments would have soon grown foul, but these white ones had
but to be sent to the wash, and all was well again; beside, with this
white costume were they more readily distinguished among the rest. For
our part we were much delighted to behold these fair ladies, and I do
assure you many of us did find more divertisement herein than in aught
else. Nor were they the least chary of giving us a sight of them, for
they did line the edge of the rampart, standing in a most gracious
and agreeable attitude, so as they were well worth our looking at and
longing after.

We were right curious to learn what ladies they were. The towns-folk
did inform us they were a company of ladies so sworn and banded
together, and so attired for the work at the fortifications and for
the performing of suchlike services to their native city. And of a
truth did they do good service, even to the more virile and stalwart of
them bearing arms. Yea! I have heard it told of one, how, for having
oft repulsed her foes with a pike, she doth to this day keep the same
carefully as ’twere a sacred relic, so that she would not part with it
nor sell it for much money, so dear a home treasure doth she hold it.

I have heard the tale told by sundry old Knights Commanders of Rhodes,
and have even read the same in an old book, how that, when Rhodes was
besieged by Sultan Soliman, the fair dames and damsels of that place
did in no wise spare their fair faces and tender and delicate bodies,
for to bear their full share of the hardships and fatigues of the
siege, but would even come forward many a time at the most hot and
dangerous attacks, and gallantly second the knights and soldiery to
bear up against the same. Ah! fair Rhodian maids, your name and fame is
for all time; and ill did you deserve to be now fallen under the rule
of infidel barbarians![28*] In the reign of our good King Francis I.,
the town of Saint-Riquier in Picardy was attempted and assailed by a
Flemish gentleman, named Domrin, Ensign of M. du Ru, accompanied by two
hundred men at arms and two thousand foot folk, beside some artillery.
Inside the place were but an hundred foot men, the which was far too
few for defence. It had for sure been captured, but that the women of
the town did appear on the walls with arms in hand, boiling water and
oil and stones, and did gallantly repulse the foe, albeit these did
exert every effort to gain an entry. Furthermore two of the said brave
ladies did wrest a pair of standards from the hands of the enemy, and
bore them from the walls into the town, the end of all being that the
besiegers were constrained to abandon the breach they had made and the
walls altogether, and make off and retire. The fame of this exploit did
spread through all France, Flanders and Burgundy; while King Francis,
passing by the place some time after, was fain to see the women
concerned, and did praise and thank them for their deed.

The ladies of Péronne[29] did in like gallant wise, when that town
was besieged by the Comte de Nassau, and did aid the brave soldiers
which were in the place in the same fashion as their sisters of
Saint-Riquier, for which they were esteemed, commended and thanked of
their sovereign.

The women of Sancerre[29] again, in the late civil wars and during the
siege of their town, were admired and praised for the noble deeds they
did at that time in all sorts.

Also, during the War of the League, the dames of Vitré[29] did acquit
them right well in similar wise at the besieging of the town by M. de
Mercueur. The women there be very fair and always right daintily put
on, and have ever been so from old time; yet did they not spare their
beauty for to show themselves manlike and courageous. And surely all
manly and brave-hearted deeds, at such a time of need, are as highly to
be esteemed in women as in men.

Of the same gallant sort were of yore the women of Carthage, who
whenas they beheld their husbands, brothers, kinsfolk and the soldiery
generally cease shooting at the foe, for lack of strings to their
bows, these being all worn out by dint of shooting all through the
long and terrible siege, and for the same cause no longer being able
to provide them with hemp, or flax, or silk, or aught else wherewithal
to make bow-strings, did resolve to cut off their lovely tresses and
fair, yellow locks, not sparing this beauteous honour of their heads
and chief adornment of their beauty. Nay! with their own fair hands, so
white and delicate, they did twist and wind the same and make it into
bow-strings to supply the men of war. And I leave you to imagine with
what high courage and mettle these would now stretch and bend their
bows, shoot their arrows and fight the foe, bearing as they did such
fine favours of the ladies.

We read in the History of Naples[30] how that great Captain Sforza,
serving under the orders of Queen Jeanne II., having been taken
prisoner by the Queen’s husband, James, and set in strict confinement
and having some taste of the strappado, would without a doubt ere much
longer have had his head cut off, but that his sister did fly to arms
and straight take the field. She made so good a fight, she in her
own person, as that she did capture four of the chiefest Neapolitan
gentlemen, and this done, sent to tell the King that whatsoever
treatment he should deal to her brother, the same would she meet out to
his friends. The end was, he was constrained to make peace and deliver
him up safe and sound. Ah! brave and gallant-hearted sister, rising so
superior to her sex’s weakness!

I do know of certain sisters and kinswomen, who if but they had dared
a like deed, some while agone, might mayhap have saved alive a gallant
brother of theirs, which was undone for lack of help and timely
succour of the sort.


                                  5.

Now am I fain to have done with the consideration of these warlike
and great-hearted dames in general, and to speak of some particular
instances of the same. And as the fairest example Antiquity hath to
show us, I will adduce the gallant Zenobia[31] only, to answer for
all. This Queen, after the death of her husband, was too wise to
waste her time, like so many others in like case, in mere lamentation
and vain regrets, but did grasp the reins of his empire in the name
of her children, and make war against the Romans and their Emperor
Aurelian,[31] at that time reigning at Rome. Much trouble did she give
these foes for eight long years, till at the last coming to a pitched
battle with his legions, she was vanquished therein and taken prisoner
and brought before the Emperor. On his asking her how she had had the
hardihood to make war against the Emperors of Rome, she did answer only
this: “Verily! I do well recognise that you are Emperor, seeing that
you have vanquished me.”

So great content had he of his victory, and so proud thereof was he
and exalted, that he was fain to hold a triumph over her. So with an
exceeding great pomp and magnificence did she walk before his triumphal
car, right gorgeously put on and adorned with much wealth of pearls and
precious stones, superb jewels and great chains of gold, wherewith she
was bound about the body and by the hands and feet, in sign of being
captive and slave of her conqueror. And so it was that by reason of
the heavy weight of her jewels and chains she was constrained to make
sundry pauses and to rest her again and again on this march of triumph.
A fine thing, of a surety, and an admirable, that all vanquished and
prisoner as she was, she could yet give the law to her triumphant
conqueror, and thus make him tarry and wait her pleasure till that she
had recovered breath! A great instance too of good feeling and honest
courtesy on the part of the Emperor, so to allow her breathing space
and rest, and to suffer her weakness, rather than unduly to constrain
or press her to hurry more than she well could. So that one doth scarce
know which to commend the more, the honourable courtesy of the Emperor,
or the Queen’s way of acting,—who it may well be, did play this part
of set purpose, not so much forced thereto by her actual weakness of
body and weariness, as for to make some show of pride and prove to all
how she would and could gather this little sprig of respect in the
evening of her fortunes no less than she had done in the morning-tide
of the same, and let them see how the Emperor did grant her this much
privilege, to wait on her slow steps and lingering progress.

Much was the Queen gazed at and admired by men and women alike, not
a few of which last had been but too glad to resemble so fair an
apparition. For truly she was one of the most lovely of women, by what
is said of the historians of these events. She was of a very fine, tall
and opulent figure, say they, her carriage right noble, and her grace
and dignity to match; furthermore her face very beautiful and exceeding
pleasing, her eyes dark and piercing. Beside her other beauties, these
writers do give her fine and very white teeth, a keen wit and a modest
bearing, a sincere and at need a kind and merciful heart. Her speech
was eloquent and spoke with a fine clear voice; moreover she was used
always to express her ideas and wishes herself to her soldiers, and
would many a time harangue the same publicly.

I ween he did so show her to best advantage, thus richly and gracefully
attired in women’s weeds, no less than when she was armed in all points
as the Warrior Queen. For sex doth always count for much; and we may
rightly suppose the Emperor was fain to display her at his triumph only
under guise of her own fair sex, wherein she would seem most beauteous
and agreeable to the populace in all the perfection of her charms.
Furthermore, ’tis to be supposed, so lovely as she was, the Emperor
had tasted and enjoyed her loveliness, and was yet in the enjoyment
thereof. So albeit he had vanquished her in one fashion, yet had
she,—or he, if you prefer it so, for the two be as one in this,—won the
victory in another.

Mine own wonder is, that seeing the said Zenobia was so beautiful,
the Emperor did not take her and keep her for one of his mistresses;
or else that she did not open and establish by his permission, or
the Senate’s, a shop or market of love and harlotry, as did the fair
Flora in the same city, for to win wealth and store up much gear and
goods, by the toil of her body and shaking of her bed. For to such a
market had surely resorted all the greatest men of Rome, one vying
with other in eagerness; seeing there is no contentment ’twould seem,
or satisfaction in all the world like that of a man’s taking his
will of a Royal or Princely person, and enjoying of a fair Queen, or
Princess or a high-born Lady. As to this I do appeal to such men as
have embarked on these voyages, and made such good traffic there. Now
in this fashion would Queen Zenobia have soon grown rich out of the
purse of these great folks, as did Flora, which did receive no others
in her place of commerce. Had it not been far better for her to make
of her life a scene of merry-making and magnificence, of money getting
and compliments, than to have fallen into that need and extremity of
poverty she did come to? For she was constrained to gain her bread
a-spinning among common work-women, and would have died of hunger, but
that the Senate, taking pity of her in view of her former greatness,
did decree her a pension for her maintenance, and some trifling lands
and possessions, which were for long after known as “Zenobia’s Lands.”
For indeed and indeed is poverty a sore evil; and whosoever can avoid
the same, no matter what transformation be taken to that end, doth well
and right, as one I wot of was used to declare.

Thus we see how Zenobia did not carry her high courage to the end of
her career, as she should,—and as folk should ever persist in every
course of action to the last. ’Tis said she had had a triumphal car
constructed, the most magnificent ever seen in Rome, to the end she
might, as she was often used to say in her days of high prosperity and
glorying, hold triumph therein at Rome. For her ambition was to conquer
and subdue the Roman Empire! Alas! for her presumption; for it did
all fall out quite otherwise, and the Emperor having won the day, did
take her car for himself, and use it in his own triumph, while she did
march a-foot, and did make as much triumph and ceremonial over her as
if he had vanquished a puissant King,—and more. Yet be sure, a victory
won over a woman, be it gained how it may, is no very great or famous
exploit!

After a like fashion did Augustus long to triumph over Cleopatra; but
he got no success in this. She did forestall him in good time, and
in the same way which Aemilius Paulus did signify in what he said to
Perseus,[32] when in his captivity he did beseech him to have pity on
him, answering him he should have seen to that beforehand, meaning that
he ought to have killed himself.

I have heard say that our late King Henri II. did long for no other
thing so sore as to be able to take prisoner the Queen of Hungary,
and this not to treat her ill, albeit she had given him many causes
of offence by her devastations of his territory, but only to have the
glory of holding this great Princess captive, and to see what bearing
and countenance she would show in her prison, and if she would then
be so gallant and proud-spirited as at the head of her armies. For in
truth there is naught else so fine and gallant as such a fair, brave
and high-born lady, when she hath will and courage as had this same
Princess, which did much delight in the name the Spanish soldiers had
given her; for just as they did call her brother the Emperor _el padre
de los soldados_, “the father of the soldiers,” so did they entitle her
_la madre_, “the mother,” of the same. So in old days, in the times of
the Romans, was Victoria or Victorina known in her armies by the name
of “the mother of the camp.” Of a surety, an if a great and beautiful
lady do undertake an exploit of war, she doth contribute much to its
success and giveth much encouragement and spirit to her folk, as myself
have seen in the case of our own Queen Mother, Catherine de Medici,
which did often visit our armies, and so doing did greatly animate
their courage and rouse their ardour. The same is done at this present
by her grand-daughter, the Infanta[33] in Flanders, which doth take the
lead of her army, and show herself a valorous chief of her fighting
men,—so much so that without her and her noble and delightful presence,
Flanders could never have been retained, as all men allow. And never
did even the Queen of Hungary herself, her grand-aunt, make so fair a
show of beauty, valour, great-heartedness and graceful bearing.

In our histories of France we do read of how much avail was the
presence of the noble-hearted Comtesse de Montfort,[33] when shut up
and besieged in Hennebon. For albeit her men were brave and valiant,
and had quit themselves in battle and withstood the enemy’s assaults
as well as ever any folk could, yet did they at the last begin to
lose heart and talk of surrendering. But she did harangue them so
eloquently, and did re-animate their courage with such good and
intrepid words, inspiriting them so finely and so well, as that they
did hold out till the succour, so long and eagerly desired, did arrive,
and the siege was raised. Nay! she did better still; for whenas the
enemy were set on the attack and were all busied therewith, seeing
their tents to be all left empty and unprotected, she did make a
sally, mounted on a good horse and with fifty good horses to follow
her. In this wise doth she surprise the camp and set it a-fire, the
result being that Charles de Blois, deeming himself to be betrayed, did
straight abandon the assault. On this subject, I will add yet another
little tale:

During the late Wars of the League, the Prince de Condé, since
deceased, being at Saint-Jean, did send to demand of Madame de
Bourdeille,[34] then a widow of the age of forty, and a very handsome
woman, six or seven of the wealthiest tenants of her estate, the which
had taken refuge in her castle of Mathas at her side. She did refuse
him outright, declaring she would never betray nor give up these
unhappy folk, who had put themselves under her protection and trusted
to her honour for their safety. On this he did summon her for the last
time, informing her that unless she would deliver them up to him, he
would teach her better obedience. She did make reply to this (for
myself was with her by way of rendering help) that, seeing he knew not
himself how to obey, she did find it very strange he should wish to
make others do so, and that so soon as he should have obeyed his King’s
orders, she would obey him. For the rest, she did declare that for all
his threats, she was afraid neither of his cannon nor of his siege, and
how that she was descended from the far-famed Comtesse de Montfort,
from whom her folk had inherited the place, and herself too, and
therewith some share of her gallantry. Further that she was determined
to defend the same so well as that he should never take it, and that
she should win no less fame herein than her ancestress, the aforesaid
Countess, had done at Hennebon. The Prince did ponder long over this
reply, and did delay some days’ space, without further threatening her.
Yet, had he not presently died, he would assuredly have laid siege to
her castle; but in that case was she right well prepared in heart,
resolution, men and gear, to receive him warmly, and I do think he
would have gotten a shameful rebuff.

Machiavelli, in his book _On the Art of War_, doth relate how that
Catherine, Countess of Forli, was besieged in that her good town
fortress by Cæsar Borgia, aided by the French army, which did make a
most gallant resistance to him, yet at the last was taken. The cause
of its loss was this, that the said strong town was over full of
fortresses and strongholds, for folk to retire from the one to the
other; so much so that Borgia having made his approaches, the Signor
Giovanni de Casale (whom the said Countess had chose for her helper and
protector), did abandon the breach to withdraw into his strongholds.
Through the which error, Borgia did force an entrance and took the
place. And so, saith the author, these errors did much wrong the
high-hearted courage and repute of the said gallant Countess, which
had withstood an army the King of Naples and the Duke of Milan had
not dared to face; and albeit the issue was unfortunate, yet did she
win the honour she so well deserved, and for this exploit many rhymes
and verses were writ in Italy in her honour. This passage is one well
worthy the attention of all such as have to do with the fortifying of
places of strength, and do set them to build therein great numbers of
castles, strongholds, fortresses and citadels.

To return to our proper subject, we have had in times past many
Princesses and high-born ladies in this our land of France, which have
given excellent marks of their prowess. As did Paule,[35*] daughter
of the Comte de Penthièvre, who was besieged in Roye by the Comte de
Charolais, and did there show herself so gallant and great-hearted
as that, on the town being taken, the Count did grant her very
good conditions, and had her conducted in safety to Compiègne, not
suffering any hurt to be done her. So greatly did he honour her for her
valour,—and this albeit he felt deep resentment against her husband,
whom he held guilty of having tried to work his death by black arts and
sundry evil devices of images and candles.

Richilda,[36] only daughter and heiress of Mons in Hainault, and
wife of Baldwyn the Sixth, Count of Flanders, did make all efforts
against Robert the Frisian, her brother-in-law, appointed guardian
of the children of Flanders, for to take away from him the duty and
administration of the same, and have it assigned to herself. To which
end she did take up arms with the help of Philip, King of France, and
hazarded two battles[36] against Count Robert. In the first she was
taken prisoner, as was likewise her foe, the said Count Robert, but
afterward were the twain given back in exchange one of the other. A
second battle followed, which she lost, her son Arnulphe being slain
therein, and was driven back to Mons.

Ysabel of France, daughter of King Philippe le Bel, and wife of Edward
II.[36] of England, and Duke of Guienne, was ill looked on of the King
her husband, through the intrigues of Hugh le Despenser, whereby she
was constrained to withdraw to France with her son Edward. Afterward
she did return to England with the Chevalier de Hainault, her kinsman,
and an army which she did lead thither, and by means of which she did
presently take her husband prisoner. Him she did deliver up into the
hands of men which did soon bring about his death; a fate that overtook
herself likewise, for by reason of her loves with a certain Lord
Mortimer, she was confined by her own son in a castle, and there ended
her days. She it was that did afford the English pretext to quarrel
with France to the sore hurt of the same. Yet surely we have here a
piece of base ingratitude on her son’s part, who all forgetful of great
benefit received, did so cruelly treat his mother for so small a fault.
Small I call it, for that ’twas but natural, and an easy thing, that
after dealing long with men of arms, and grown so accustomed to go in
manly guise with them amid armies and tents and camps, she should do
the like also a-bed.

This is a thing oft times seen to happen. For example I do refer me
to our Queen Léonor,[37*] Duchess of Guienne, which did accompany her
husband over seas and to the Holy Wars. By dint of much frequenting
of men at arms and troopers and such folk, she did come to derogate
very gravely from her honour,—so far as that she did have dealings
even with the Saracens. For the which the King her husband did put her
away, a thing that cost us very dear. We can but suppose she was fain
to try whether these worthy foes were as gallant champions in a lady’s
chamber as in the open field, and that mayhap ’twas her humour to ever
love valiant wights, and that one valiance doth ever attract another,
as virtue doth to virtue. For verily he saith most true, which doth
declare virtue to be like the lightning, that pierceth through all
things.

The said Queen Léonor was not the only lady which did accompany her
husband to these same Holy Wars. But both before her day, and with her,
and after her, no few other Princesses and great ladies did along with
their lords take the cross,—not that they did therefore cross their
legs, but did rather open these and stretch them right wide, in such
wise that while some did remain there for good and all, others came
back from the wars most finished harlots. So under pretext of visiting
the Holy Sepulchre, amid all that press of arms they did much amorous
wantoning; for verily, as I have observed afore, arms and love do well
accord together, so close and congruous is the sympathy betwixt these
twain.

Suchlike dames ought surely to be esteemed, loved and treated like
men,—not as the Amazons did of old, which proclaiming themselves
daughters of Mars, did rid them of their husbands, pretending marriage
was sheer slavery; yet desire enough and to spare had they to go with
other men, for to have daughters of them, but killing all the male
children.

Jo. Nauclerus, in his _Cosmography_,[38*] relates how, in the year of
Christ 1123, after the death of Tibussa, Queen of the Bohemians, she
who did first close in the town of Prague with walls, and who did very
greatly abhor the power and domination of men, there was one of her
damsels, by name Valasca, which did so well gain over the maids and
matrons of that land by her fair and alluring promises of liberty,
and did so thoroughly disgust and set them against their servitude to
manfolk, as that they did slay each her man, one her husband, another
her brother, another her kinsman or next neighbour, and so in less than
no time were mistresses of the realm. Then having taken their husbands’
harness of war, they did make such good use thereof, and grew so
valiant and skilled in arms, fighting after the Amazon fashion, as that
they soon gat them several victories. Yet were they presently, by the
conduct and cunning wiles of one Primislaus, husband of Tibussa, a man
she had raised up from low and humble state, routed entirely and put to
death. This was sure God Almighty’s vengeance for so heinous an act
and dread attempt, no less indeed than to destroy the human race itself.


                                  6.

Thus did these Amazonian dames find no other fashion of showing forth
their gallant spirit for fine, bold and manly exploits but only by
these cruel deeds we have named. On the contrary, how many Empresses,
Queens, Princesses and other high-born Ladies, have done the like by
means of noble acts, both in the governance and management of their
dominions, and in other excellent ways, whereof the Histories be so
full that I need not recount the same. For the desire of holding sway,
of reigning and ruling, doth lodge within women’s breasts no less than
in men’s, and they be just as eager after domination as the other sex.

Well! now I am about to speak of one that was unsullied of this
ambition, to wit Vittoria Colonna,[39] wife of the Marquis de Pescaire.
I have read of this lady in a Spanish book, how that whenas the said
Marquis did hearken to the fine offers made him by Hieronimo Mouron
on the Pope’s behalf (as I have said in a previous passage) of the
Kingdom of Naples, if only he would enter into the league with him,
she being informed of the matter by her husband himself, who did never
hide aught from her of his privy affairs, neither small nor great, did
write to him (for she had an excellent gift of language), and bade him
remember his ancient valour and virtue, the which had given him such
glory and high repute, as that these did exceed the fame and fortune of
the greatest Kings of the earth. She then went on: _non con grandeza
de los reynos, de Estados ny de hermosos titulos, sino con fè illustre
y clara virtud, se alcançava la honra, la qual con loor siempre vivo,
legava a los descendientes; y que no havia ningun grado tan alto que no
fuese vencido de una trahicion y mala fe. Que por esto, ningun deseo
tenia de ser muger de rey, queriendo antes ser muger de tal capitan,
que no solamente en guerra con valorosa mano, mas en paz con gran
honra de animo no vencido, havia sabido vencer reyes, y grandissimos
principes, y capitanes, y darlos a triunfos, y imperiarlos_,—“not by
the greatness of Kingdoms and of vast Dominions, nor yet of high and
sounding titles, but by fair faith and unsullied virtue, is honour
won,—the virtue that with ever living praise doth go down to all
descendants. And there is never a rank so exalted but it were undone
and spoiled by treason wrought and good faith broke. For such a prize
she had no wish to be a King’s wife, but had rather be a simple
Captain’s such as he, which not alone in war by his valiant arm, but in
peace likewise with the honour of an unbroken spirit, had been strong
to vanquish Kings, great Princes and mighty Captains, to triumph over
the same and master them.” High courage and virtue and truth did all
mark this lady’s words; for truly to reign by ill faith is a very evil
and sorry thing, but to give the law to Kings and kingdoms by honesty
and worth a right noble one.

Fulvia, wife of Publius Clodius, and in second wedlock that of Mark
Antony, finding but small amusement in her household tasks, did set
herself to higher business, to manage affairs of State that is, till
she did win herself the repute of ruling the Rulers of Rome.[40*] And
indeed Cleopatra did owe her some gratitude and obligation for having
so well trained and disciplined Mark Antony to obey and bend him under
the laws of submission.

We read moreover of that great French Prince Charles Martel, which in
his day would never take nor bear the title of King, as ’twas within
his power to do, but liked better to govern Kings and give orders to
the same.

However let us speak of some of our own countrywomen. We had, in our
War of the League, Madame de Montpensier, sister of the late Duc de
Guise, who was a great Stateswoman, and did contribute much, as well
by the subtile inventions of her fine spirit as by the labour of her
hands, to build up the said league. And after the same had been now
well established, playing one day at cards (for she doth well love this
pastime) and taking the first deal, on their telling her she should
well shuffle the cards, she did answer before all the company: “I have
shuffled the cards so well, as that they could not be better shuffled
or combined together.” This would all have turned out well, if only her
friends had lived; on whose unhappy end however, without losing heart
at all at such a loss, she did set herself to avenge them. And having
heard the news when in Paris, she doth not shut herself in her chamber
to indulge her grief, as most other women would have done, but cometh
forth of her house with her brother’s children, and holding these by
the hand, doth take them up and down the city, making public mourning
of her bereavement before the citizens, rousing the same by her tears
and piteous cries and sad words which she did utter to all, to take up
arms and rise in fierce protest, and insult the King’s[41] house and
picture, as we have seen done, and I do hope to relate in his life,
and deny all fealty to him, swearing rank rebellion to his authority,
all which did presently result in his murder. As to which ’tis well
enough known what persons, men and women, did counsel the same, and are
properly guilty thereof. Of a surety no sister’s heart, losing such
brothers, could well digest such deadly venom without vengeance of this
foul murder.

I have heard it related how after she had thus put the good folk of
Paris in so great a state of animosity and dissatisfaction, she did set
her forth to ask of the Duke of Parma his help toward her vengeance.
So thither she maketh her way, but by such long and heavy stages as
that her coach horses were left so wearied out and foundered, stranded
in the mire somewhere in the very midst of Picardy, that they could
not go another step either forward or backward, nor put one foot
before another. As chance would have it, there did pass that way a
very honourable gentleman of that countryside, which was a Protestant,
and who, albeit she was disguised both as to name and in dress, did
recognize her well enough. But yet, ignoring all the hurts she had
wrought against his fellows in religion, and the hatred she bare them,
with frank and full courtesy, he did thus accost her: “Madam, I know
you well, and am your most humble servant. I find you in ill case, and
beg you, an if you will, come to my house, which is close at hand, to
dry your clothes and rest you. I will afford you every convenience I
can to the very best of my ability. Have no fear; for though I be of
the reformed faith, which you do hate so sore in us, I would fain not
leave you without offering you a courtesy you do stand much in need
of.” This fair offer she did in no wise refuse, but did accept very
readily; then after that he had provided her with such things as were
needful, she doth take the road again, he conducting her on her way two
leagues, though all the while she did keep secret from him the purport
of her journey. Later on in the course of the war, by what I have
heard, she did repay her debt to the said gentleman by many acts of
courtesy done him.

Many have wondered at her trusting of herself to him, being Huguenot
as he was. But there! necessity hath no law; and beside, she did see
him so honourable seeming, and heard him speak so honestly and frankly,
that she could not but believe him disposed to deal fairly with her.

As for Madame de Nemours, her mother, who was thrown into prison after
the murder of her noble son’s children, there can be little doubt of
the despair and desolation she was left in by so intolerable a loss;
and albeit till that day she had ever shown herself of a gentle and
cold humour, and one that did need good and sufficient cause to rouse
her, she did now spew forth a thousand insults against the King, and
cast in his teeth a thousand curses and execrations, going so far (for
verily what deed or word could ever match the vehemence of such a loss
and bitter sorrow?) as always to speak of him by no other name but
this, _that Tyrant_. Later, being come somewhat to herself, she would
say: “Alas! what say I,—Tyrant? Nay! nay! I will not call him so, but a
most good and clement King, if only he will kill me as he hath killed
my children, to take me out of the wretchedness wherein I am, and
remove me to the blessedness of God’s heaven!” Later again, softening
still further her words and bitter cries, and finding some surcease
of sorrow, she would say naught else but only, “Ah! my children! my
poor children!”—repeating these same words over and over again with
floods of tears, that ’twould have melted an heart of stone. Alas!
she might well lament and deplore them so sore, being so good and
great hearted, so virtuous and so valorous, as they were, but above
all the noble Duc de Guise, a worthy eldest son and true paragon of
all valour and true-heartedness. Moreover she did love her children
so fondly, that one day as I was discoursing with a noble lady of the
Court of the said Madame de Nemours, she told me how that Princess was
the happiest in all the world, for sundry reasons which she did give
me,—except only in one thing, which was that she did love her children
over much; for that she did love them with such excess of fondness
as that the common anxiety she had of their safety and the fear some
ill should happen them, did cloud all her happiness, making her to
live always in inquietude and alarm for their sake. I leave you then,
reader, to imagine how grievous was the sorrow, bitterness and pain she
did feel at the death of these twain, and how lively the terror for
the other,[42*] which was away in the neighbourhood of Lyons, as well
as for the Duke her husband, then a prisoner. For of his imprisonment
she had never a suspicion, as herself did declare, nor of his death
neither, as I have said above.

When she was removed from the Castle of Blois to be conveyed to that of
Amboise for straiter confinement therein, just as she had passed the
gate, she did turn her round and lifted her head toward the figure of
King Louis XII., her grandfather, which is there carven in stone above
the door, on horseback and with a very noble mien and warlike bearing.
So she, tarrying there a little space and gazing thereon, said in a
loud voice before a great number of folk which had come together, with
a fine bold look which did never desert her: “An if he which is there
pourtrayed were alive, he would never suffer his granddaughter thus
to be carried away prisoner, and treated as she is this day.” Then
with these words, she did go on her way, without further remonstrance.
Understand this, that in her heart she was invoking and making appeal
to the manes of that her great-hearted ancestor, to avenge her of
the injustice of her imprisonment. Herein she acted precisely as did
certain of the conspirators for Cæsar’s death, which as they were
about to strike their blow, did turn them toward the statue of Pompey,
and did inwardly invoke and make appeal to the shade of his valiant
arm, so puissant of old, to conduct the emprise they were set on to a
successful issue. It may well be the invocation of this Princess may
have something aided and advanced the death of the King which had so
outraged her. A lady of high heart and spirit which doth thus brood
over vengeance to come is no little to be dreaded.

I do remember me how, when her late husband, the Duc de Guise, did get
the stroke whereof he died, she was at the time in his camp, having
come thither some days previously to visit the same. So soon as ever
he did come into his quarters wounded, she did advance to meet him as
far as the door of his lodging all tearful and despairing, and after
saluting him, did suddenly cry out: “Can it be that the wretch which
hath struck this blow and he that hath set him on (signifying her
suspicion of the Admiral de Coligny) should go unpunished? Oh God! an
if thou art just, as thou must needs be, avenge this deed; or else
...,” but stopping at this word, she did not end her sentence, for that
her noble husband did interrupt her, saying: “Nay! dear heart, defy not
God. An if ’tis He which hath sent me this for my sins, His will be
done, and we should glorify him therefor. But an if it come from other,
seeing vengeance is His alone, He will surely exact the penalty without
you.” Natheless, when he was dead, did she so fiercely follow up her
revenge, as that the murderer was torn to pieces of four horses,[43*]
while the supposed author of the crime was assassinated after the lapse
of some years, as I will tell in its proper place. This was due to the
instruction she did give her son, as myself have seen, and the counsel
and persuasion she did feed him withal from his tenderest years, till
at the last final and complete vengeance was accomplished.


                                  7.

The counsel and appeal of great-hearted wives and loving mothers be of
no small avail in such matters. As to this, I do remember me how, when
King Charles IX. was making his Royal progress about his Kingdom, and
was now at Bordeaux, the Baron de Bournazel was put in prison, a very
brave and honourable gentleman of Gascony, for having slain another
gentleman of his own neighbourhood, named La Tour,—and, so ’twas said,
by dint of much traitorous subtlety. The widow did so eagerly press for
his punishment, as that care was taken the news should reach the King’s
and Queen’s chambers, that they were about to cut off the said Baron’s
head. Hereon did the gentlemen and ladies of the Court of a sudden
bestir themselves, and much effort was made to save his life. Twice
over were the King and Queen besought to grant his pardon. The High
Chancellor did set him strongly against this, saying justice must needs
be done; whereas the King was much in favour of mercy, for that he was
a young man, and asked for naught better than to save his life, as he
was one of the gallants frequenting the Court, and M. de Cipierre[44]
was keen in urging the same course. Yet was the hour of execution
now drawing nigh, without aught being done,—to the astonishment of
everybody.

Hereupon did M. de Nemours intervene, which loved the unhappy Baron,
who had followed him gallantly on sundry fields of battle. The Duke
went and threw himself at the Queen’s feet, and did earnestly beseech
her to give the poor gentleman his life, begging and praying so hard
and pressing her so with his words as that the favour was e’en given
him at the last. Then on the instant was sent a Captain of the Guard,
which went and sought the man out and took him from the prison, just
as he was being led forth to his doom. Thus was he saved, but in such
fearful circumstances that a look of terror did remain ever after
imprinted on his features, and he could never thereafter regain his
colour, as myself have seen. I have heard tell how the same thing did
happen to M. de Saint-Vallier, which did have a fine escape by the
interest of M. de Bourbon.

Meantime however the widow was not idle, but did come next day to
intercept the King as he was going to Mass, and did throw herself at
his feet. She did present him her son, which might be three or four
years old, saying thus: “At the least, Sire, as you have given pardon
to this child’s murderer, I do beseech you grant the same to him now
at this moment, for the time when he shall be grown up and shall have
taken his vengeance and slain that wretch.” And from that time onward,
by what I have heard said, the mother would come every morning to awake
her child; and showing him the bloody shirt his father had on when he
was killed, would repeat to him three times over: “Mark this token,
well, and bear well in mind, when you be grown up, to avenge this
wrong; else do I disinherit you.” A bitter spirit of revenge truly!

Myself when I was in Spain, did hear the tale how Antonio Roques, one
of the most brave and valiant, cunning, cautious and skilful, famous
and withal most courteous, bandits ever was in all Spain (’tis a matter
of common knowledge), did in his early years desire to enter religion
and be ordained priest. But the day being now come when he was to sing
his first mass, just as he was coming forth from the vestry and was
stepping with great ceremony toward the High Altar of his parish Church
duly robed and accoutred to do his office, and chalice in hand, he did
hear his mother saying to him as he passed her: _Ah! vellaco, vellaco,
mejor seria de vengar la muerte de tu padre, que de cantar misa_,—“Ah!
wretch and miscreant that you are! ’twere better far to avenge your
father’s death than to be singing Mass.” This word did so touch him
at heart, as that he doth coldly turn him about in mid progress, and
back to the vestry, where he doth unrobe him, pretending his heart had
failed him from indisposition, and that it should be for another time.
Then off to the mountains to join the brigands, among whom he doth
presently win such esteem and renown that he was chose their chief;
there he doth many crimes and thefts, and avengeth his father’s death,
which had been killed, some said, of a comrade, though others declared
him a victim of the King’s justice. This tale was told me by one that
was a bandit himself, and had been under his orders in former days.
This man did bepraise him to the third heaven; and true it is the
Emperor Charles could never do him any hurt.

But to return once more to Madame de Nemours, the King did keep her in
prison scarce any time, whereof was M. d’Escars in part the cause. He
did soon release her, for to send her on a mission to the Ducs du Maine
and de Nemours, and other Princes members of the League, bearing to all
words of peace and oblivion of all past grievances:—dead men were dead,
and there an end; best be good friends as aforetime. In fact, the King
did take an oath of her, that she would faithfully perform this said
embassy. Accordingly on her arrival, at first accost ’twas naught but
tears and lamentations and regrets for all their losses; then anon did
she make report of her instructions, whereto M. du Maine did reply,
asking her if this were her own advice. She answered simply: “I have
not come hither, my son, to advise you, but only to repeat to you the
message I am charged withal and bidden give you. ’Tis for you to think
whether you have sufficient cause to do so, and if your duty points
that way. As to what I tell you, your heart and your conscience should
give you the best advice. For myself, I do but discharge a commission
I have promised to fulfil.” Natheless, under the rose, she knew well
enough how to stir the fire, which did long burn so fierce.

Many folks have wondered greatly, how the King, that was so wise and
one of the most adroit men of his Kingdom, came to employ this lady
for such an office, having so sorely injured her that she could have
had neither heart nor feeling if she had taken therein the very least
pains in the world; but there, she did simply make mock of him and his
instructions. Report said at the time this was the fine advice of the
Maréchal de Retz, who did give a like piece of counsel to King Charles,
namely to send M. de la Noue into the town of La Rochelle, for to
persuade the inhabitants to peace and their proper duty and allegiance.
The better to accredit him to them, he did permit him to play the
eager partisan on their side and on his own, to fight desperately for
them, and give them counsel and advice against the King,—but all under
this condition that when his services should be claimed by the King or
the King’s brother, which was his Lieutenant General, and he ordered
to leave the place, he would obey. This he did and all else, making
fierce enough war, and finally quitting the place; yet meanwhile he
did so confirm his folk and sharpen their spirit, and did give them
such excellent lessons and so greatly encouraged them, as that for that
time they did cut our beards to rights for us.[45*] Many would have it,
there was no subtlety in all this; but I did see it all with mine own
eyes, and I do hope to give full account of these doings elsewhere. At
any rate this was all the said Maréchal did avail his King and country;
one that ’twere more natural surely to hold a charlatan and swindler
than a good counsellor and a Marshal of France.

I will tell one other little word of the aforesaid Duchesse de Nemours.
I have heard it said that at the time they were framing the famous
League, and she would be examining the papers and the lists of the
towns which did join it, not yet seeing Paris figuring therein, she
would ever say to her son: “All this is naught, my son; we must have
Paris to boot. If you have not Paris, you have done naught; wherefore,
ho! for Paris city.” And never a word but Paris, Paris, was always in
her mouth; and the end of it all was the barricades that were seen
afterward.


                                  8.

In this we see how a brave heart doth ever fly at the highest game.
And this doth again remind me of a little tale I have read in a
Spanish Romance called _la Conquista de Navarra_, “The Conquest of
Navarre.”[46] This Kingdom having been taken and usurped from King John
of Navarre by the King of Aragon, Louis XII. did send an army under M.
de la Palice to win it back. Our King did send word to the Queen, Donna
Catherine, by M. de la Palice which did bring her the news, that she
should come to the Court of France and there tarry with his Queen Anne,
while that the King, her husband, along with M. de la Palice was making
essay to recover the Kingdom. The Queen did make him this gallant
answer: “How now, Sir! I did suppose the King your master had sent
you hither for to carry me with you to my Kingdom and set me again at
Pampeluna, and for me to accompany you thither, as my mind was made up
to do and my preparations made. Yet now you bid me go stay at the Court
of France? Truly a poor hope and ill augury for me! I see plainly
I shall never set foot in mine own land again.” And even as she did
presage, the thing fell out.

It was told and commanded the Duchess de Valentinois, on the approach
of the death of King Henri II., when his health was now despaired of,
to retire to her mansion in Paris, and go no more into his chamber,—to
the end she might not disturb him in his pious meditations, and no less
on account of the hostility certain did bear her. Then when she had
so withdrawn, they did send to her again to demand sundry rings and
jewels, which did belong to the Crown and which she must give back.
At this she did on a sudden ask the worthy spokesman: “Why! is the
King dead then?”—“No! Madam,” replied the other, “but it can scarce
be long first.”—“As long as there is one breath of life left in his
body, I would have my enemies to know I fear them not a whit, and that
I will never obey them, so long as he shall be alive. My courage is
still invincible. But when he is dead, I care not to live on after him,
and all the vexations you could inflict on me would be but kindness
compared with the bitterness of my loss. So, whether my King be quick
or dead, I fear not mine enemies at all.”

Herein did this fair lady show great spirit, and a true heart. Yet she
did not die, ’twill be objected of some, as she did say she would.
True! yet did she not fail to experience some threatenings of death;
beside, she did better to choose rather to live than to die, for to
show her enemies she was no wise afeared of them. Having erst seen
them shake and tremble before her, she would fain escape doing the
same before them, and did wish to show so good a face and confident
look to them as that they never durst do her any displeasure. Nay!
more than this; within two years’ space they did seek to her more
than ever, and renewed their friendship with her, as I did myself see.
And this is the way with great lords and ladies, which have little
solid continuance in their friendships, and in their differences do
readily make it up again, like thieves at a fair, and the same with all
their loves and hatreds. This we smaller folks do never do; for either
we must needs fight, avenge and die, or else make up the quarrel by
way of punctilious, minutely ordered and carefully arranged terms of
agreement. So in this we do play the better part.

We cannot but admire this lady’s conduct and behaviour; and truly these
high-born dames which have to do with affairs of State, do commonly act
in a grander way than the ordinary run of women. And this is why our
late King Henri III., last deceased, and the Queen, his mother, did
by no means love such ladies of their Court as did much trouble their
wits with matters of State and put their nose therein and did concern
them to speak of other matters near touching the government of the
Kingdom. ’Twas as if, their Majesties were used to declare, they had
some great part therein and might be heirs of the same, or just as if
they had given the sweat of their bodies and force of their hands to
its management and maintenance, like men; whereas, for a mere pastime,
talking at the fireside, sitting comfortably in their chairs or lying
on their pillows, or their daybeds, they would discourse at their ease
of the world at large and the state of the Country, as if they did
arrange it all. On this point a certain great lady of fashion, whom I
will not name, did one time make a shrewd reply, who taking on her to
say out all her say on occasion of the first meeting of the Estates at
Blois, their Majesties did cause a slight reprimand to be given her,
telling her she should attend to the affairs of her own house and her
prayers to God. To this being something too free in her speech, she
did answer thus: “In days of yore when Princes, Kings and great Lords
did take the cross and hie them over-seas, to do so noble exploits in
the Holy Land, insooth ’twas allowed us women only to fast and pray,
make orisons and vows, that God might give them a successful journey
and a safe return. But nowadays that we do see them do naught better
than ourselves, ’tis surely allowed us to speak of all matters; for as
to praying God for them, why should we do so, seeing they do no more
heroic deeds than ourselves?”

This speech was for sure too bold and outspoken, and indeed it came
very nigh to costing her dear. She had all the difficulty in the world
to win pardon and excuse, which she had to ask for right humbly; and
had it not been for a certain private reason I could tell, and if I
would, she had received dire pains and penalties therefor, and very
signal punishment.

’Tis not always well to speak out a sharp saying such as this, when
it cometh to the lips. Myself have seen not a few folk which could in
no wise govern their wit in this sort, but were more untamed than a
Barbary charger. Finding a good shrewd gibe in their mouth, out they
must spit it, without sparing relations, friends or superiors. Many
such I have known at our own Court of France, where they were well
called _Marquis et Marquises de belle-bouche_, “Lords and Ladies of
Frank Speech;” but many and many a time did their frank speech bring
them in sore trouble.


                                  9.

Having thus described the brave and gallant bearing of sundry ladies
on sundry noble occasions of their life, I am fain now to give some
examples of the like high qualities displayed at their death. Without
borrowing any instance of Antiquity, I will merely adduce that of the
late deceased Queen Regent[47] mother of our noble King Francis I. In
her day this Princess, as I have heard many of mine acquaintance say,
both men and women, was a very fair lady, and very gay and gallant to
boot, which she did continue to be even in her declining years. And for
this cause, when folk did talk to her of death, she did exceedingly
mislike such discourse, not excepting preachers which did hold forth
on this subject in their sermons. “As if,” she would cry, “we did not
all of us know well enough we must one day die. The fact is, these
preachers, whenas they can find naught further to say in their sermons,
and be at the end of their powers of invention, like other simple folk,
do take refuge in this theme of death.” The late Queen of Navarre, her
daughter, did no less than her mother detest these same harpings on
death and sermonizings on mortality.

Well, being now come near her fated end, and lying on her deathbed,
three days before that event, she did see her chamber at night all lit
up by a brilliant gleam shining in through the window. She did hereupon
chide her bedchamber women, which were sitting up with her, asking them
for why they did make so big and bright a fire. But they did answer,
that there was but a small fire burning, and that ’twas the moon which
did shine so bright and cause the illumination. “Why!” she did exclaim,
“there is no moon at this time of the month; it hath no business to be
shining now.” And of a sudden, bidding open her curtain, she did behold
a comet, which shone right on her bed. “Ah, look!” she cried, “yonder
is a sign which doth not appear for persons of common quality. God
doth show it forth only for us great lords and ladies. Shut the window
again; ’tis a comet, announcing my death; we must prepare therefor.” So
next morning, having sent to seek her confessor, she did perform all
the duty of a good Christian, albeit the physicians did assure her she
was not yet come to this. “Had I not seen the sign of my death,” she
said, “I should believe you, for indeed I do not feel me so far gone,”
and thereon did describe to them all the appearance of the comet.
Finally, three days later, leaving all concerns of this world, she did
pass away.

I cannot but believe but that great ladies, and such as be young,
beautiful and high-born, do feel greater and more sore regret to leave
this world than other women. Yet will I now name some such, which
have made light of death, and have met the same with a good heart,
though for the moment the announcement thereof was exceeding bitter
and hateful to them. The late Comtesse de La Rochefoucault,[48*] of
the house of Roye, in my opinion and that of many beside, one of the
fairest and most charming women in all France, when her minister (for
she was of the Reformed Faith, as everybody is aware) did warn her
she must think no more of worldly things, and that her hour was now
come, that she must presently away to God which was calling her, and
leave all worldly vanities, which were naught as compared with the
blessedness of heaven, she said to him thus: “This is all very well,
Sir Minister, to say to women which have no great contentment and
pleasure in this world, and which have one foot in the grave already;
but to me, that am no more than in the bloom of mine age and my delight
in this world and my beauty, your sentence is exceeding bitter. And
albeit I have more cause to hug myself in this world than in any other,
and much reason to regret dying, yet would I fain show you my high
courage herein, and do assure you I take my death with as good will
as the most common, abject, low, foul old crone that ever was in this
world.” So presently, she did set her to sing psalms with much pious
devotion, and so died.

Madame d’Espernon,[49*] of the house of Candale, was attacked of so
sudden and deadly a malady as that she was carried off in less than a
week. Before her death, she did essay all remedies which might cure
her, imploring the help of men and of God in most fervent prayers, as
well as of all her friends, and her retainers male and female, taking
it very hard that she was to die so young. But when they did reason
with her and inform her she must verily and indeed quit this world,
and that no remedy was of any avail: “Is it true?” she said; “leave me
alone then, I will make up my mind to bear it bravely.” These were the
exact words she used. Then lifting up her two soft, white arms, and
laying her two hands one against the other, with an open look and a
confident spirit, she made her ready to wait death with all patience,
and to leave this world, which she did proceed to abjure in very pious
and Christian terms. Thus did she die as a devout and good Christian
should, at the age of twenty-six, being one of the handsomest and most
charming women of her time.

’Tis not right, they say, to praise one’s own belongings; on the other
hand what is at once good and true should not be kept hid. This is why
I am fain in this place to commend Madame d’Aubeterre,[50] mine own
niece and daughter of my elder brother, who as all they that have seen
her at Court or elsewhere will go with me in saying, was one of the
fairest and most perfect ladies you could see, as well in body as in
mind. The former did plainly and externally show forth its excellence
in her handsome and charming face, her graceful figure, and all her
sweet mien and bearing; while for the mind, ’twas divinely gifted and
ignorant of naught it were meet to know. Her discourse was very fit,
simple and unadorned, and did flow right smoothly and agreeably from
her lips, whether in serious converse or in merry interchange of wit.
No woman have I ever seen which, in my opinion, did more resemble
our Queen Marguerite of France, as well in her general air as in her
special charms; and I did once hear the Queen Mother say the same. To
say this is by itself commendation enough, so I will add no more; none
which have ever seen her, will, I am well assured, give me the lie as
to this. Of a sudden it befell this lady to be attacked by a malady,
which the physicians did fail to recognize rightly, merely wasting
their Latin in the attempt. Herself, however, did believe she had been
poisoned; though I will not say in what quarter. Still God will avenge
all, and mayhap the guilty in this matter will yet be punished. She
did all she could in the way of remedies,—though not, she did declare,
because she was afeared of dying. For since her husband’s death, she
had lost all fear of this, albeit he was for sure in no wise her equal
in merit, nor deserving of her or of the tender tears her fair eyes did
shed after his death. Yet would she have been right glad to live on a
while longer for the love of her daughter, the which she was leaving a
tender slip of a girl. This last was a good and excellent reason, while
regrets for an husband that was both foolish and vexatious are surely
but vain and idle.

Thus she, seeing now no remedy was of avail, and feeling her own pulse,
which she did herself try and find to be galloping fast (for she had
understanding of all such matters), two days before she died, did send
to summon her daughter,[51] and did make her a very good and pious
exhortation, such as no other mother mayhap that I know of could have
made a finer one or one better expressed,—at once instructing her how
to live in this world and how to win the grace of God in the next; this
ended, she did give her her blessing, bidding her no more trouble with
her tears the sweet easefulness and repose she was about to enjoy with
God. Presently she did ask for her mirror, and looking at herself very
fixedly therein, did exclaim, “Ah! traitor face, that doth in no wise
declare my sickness (for indeed ’twas as fair to look on as ever), thou
art yet unchanged; but very soon death, which is drawing nigh, will
have the better of thy beauty, which shall rot away and be devoured of
worms.” Moreover she had put the most part of her rings on her fingers;
and gazing on these, and her hand withal, which was very well shaped:
“Lo! a vanity I have much loved in days gone-by; yet now I do quit
the same willingly, to bedeck me in the other world with another much
fairer adornment.”

Then seeing her sisters weeping their eyes out at her bedside, she
did comfort them, exhorting them to take in good part, as she did,
what God was pleased to send her, and saying that as they had always
loved each other so well, they should not grieve at that which did
bring her only joy and contentment. She did further tell them that the
fond friendship she had ever borne them should be eternal, beseeching
them to return her the like, and above all to extend it to her child.
Presently seeing them but weep the harder at this, she said once more:
“Sisters mine, an if ye do love me, why do ye not rejoice with me over
the exchange I make of a wretched life for one most happy? My soul,
wearied of so many troubles, doth long to be free, and to be in blessed
rest with Jesus Christ my Saviour. Yet you would fain have it still
tied to this miserable body, which is but its prison, not its domicile.
I do beseech you, therefore, my sisters, torment yourselves no more.”

Many other the like words did she prefer, so pious and Christian as
that there is never a Divine, however great could have uttered better
or more blessed,—all which I do pass over. In especial she did often
ask to see Madame de Bourdeille, her mother, whom she had prayed her
sisters to send fetch, and kept saying to them: “Oh! sisters, is not
Madame de Bourdeille coming yet? Oh! how slow your couriers be! they be
really not fit to ride post and make special speed.” Her mother did at
last arrive, but never saw her alive, for she had died an hour before.

She did ask earnestly too for me, whom she ever spake of as her dear
uncle, and did send us her last farewell. She did beg them to have her
body opened after death, a thing she had always strongly abhorred, to
the end, as she said to her sisters, that the cause of her death being
more evidently discovered, this should enable them and her daughter
the better to take precautions and so preserve their lives. “For I must
admit,” she said, “a suspicion that I was poisoned five years agone
along with mine uncle de Brantôme and my sister the Comtesse de Durtal;
but I did get the biggest piece. Yet would I willingly charge no one
with such a crime, for fear it should prove a false accusation and my
soul be weighted with the guilt thereof,—my soul which I do earnestly
desire may be free of all blame, rancour, ill-will and sinfulness, that
it may fly straight to God its Creator.”

I should never have done, if I were to repeat all; for her discourse
was full and long, and such as did show no sign at all of an outwearied
body or a weak and failing spirit. As to this, there was a certain
gentleman, her neighbour, a witty talker and one she had loved to
converse and jest withal, who did present himself and to whom she said:
“Ha, ha! good friend! needs must give in this fall, tongue and sword
and all. So, fare you well!”

Her physician and her sisters did wish her to take some cordial
medicine or other; but she begged them not to give it her, “for these
would merely,” she said, “be helping to prolong my pain and put off
my final rest.” So she did ask them to leave her alone; and was again
and again heard to say: “Dear God! how gentle sweet is death! who had
ever dreamed it could be so?” Then, little by little, yielding up her
spirit very softly, she did close her eyes, without making any of those
hideous and fearsome signs that death doth show in many at the supreme
moment.

Madame de Bourdeille, her mother, was not long in following her. For
the melancholy she did conceive at the death of this her noble daughter
did carry her off in eighteen months, after a sickness lasting seven
months, at one time giving cause for good hope of recovery, at another
seeming desperate. But from the very first, herself did declare she
would never get the better of it, in no wise fearing death, and never
praying God to grant her life and health, but only patience in her
sufferings and above that He would send her a peaceful death, and one
neither painful nor long drawn out. And so it befell; for while we
deemed her only fainted, she did give up her soul so gently as that she
was never seen to move either foot or arm or limb, nor give any fearful
and hideous look; but casting a glance around with eyes that were as
fair as ever, she passed away, remaining as beautiful in death as she
had been when alive and in the plenitude of her charms.

A sore pity, verily, of her and of all fair ladies that die so in the
bloom of their years! Only I do believe this, that Heaven, not content
with those fair lights which from the creation of the world do adorn
its vault, is fain, beside these, to have yet other new stars to still
illumine us, as erst they did when alive, with their beauteous eyes.

Another example, and then an end:

You have seen in these last days the case of Madame de Balagny,[52*]
true sister in all ways of the gallant Bussy. When Cambrai was
besieged, she did all ever she could, of her brave and noble heart, to
prevent its being taken; but after having in vain exhausted herself in
every sort of defensive means she could contrive, and seeing now ’twas
all over and the town already in the enemy’s power, and the citadel
soon to go the same road, unable to endure the smart and heart’s pang
of evacuating her Principality (for her husband and herself had gotten
themselves to be called Prince and Princess of Cambrai and Cambrésis,—a
title sundry nations did find odious and much too presumptuous, seeing
their rank was but that of plain gentlefolk), did die of grief and so
perished at the post of honour. Some say she did die by her own hand,
an act deemed however more Pagan than Christian. Be this as it may, she
deserveth but praise for her gallantry and bravery in all this, and for
the rebuke she did administer her husband at the time of her death,
when she thus said to him: “How can you endure, Balagny, to live on
after your most dismal fall of Fortune, to be a spectacle and laughing
stock to all the world, which will point the finger of scorn at you,
thus falling from great glory whereto you had been elevated to the low
place I see awaiting you, and if you follow not my example? Learn then
of me to die nobly, and not survive your misfortunes and disgrace.”
’Tis a grand thing thus to see a woman teaching us how to live,—and
how to die. Yet would he neither obey nor believe her; but at the end
of seven or eight months, quick forgetting the memory of this gallant
lady, he did re-wed with the sister of Madame de Monceaux,[53] no doubt
a fair and honourable damosel,—manifesting to all and sundry how that
to keep alive was his one thing needful, be it on what terms it may.

Of a surety life is good and sweet; natheless is a noble death greatly
to be commended, such as was this lady’s, who dying as she did of
grief, doth appear of a contrary complexion to that of some women,
which are said to be of an opposite nature to men, for that they do die
of joy and in joy.


                                  10.
Of this sort of death I will allege only the instance of Mlle. de
Limueil, the elder, which did die at Court, being one of the Queen’s
maids of honour. All through her sickness, whereof she died, her tongue
did never leave off wagging, but she did talk continuously; for she
was a very great chatterbox, a sayer of very witty and telling scoffs,
and a very fine woman withal. When the hour of her death was come, she
did summon her chamber valet to her; for each maid of honour hath her
own. He was called Julian, and did play excellently on the violin.
“Julian,” saith she to him, “come take your violin and go on playing
me the _Défaite des Suisses_ (Switzers’ Rout)[54] till I be dead, and
play it as well as ever you can; and when you come to the words, _Tout
est perdu_ (“All is lost”), play the passage over four or five times as
pathetically as you may.” This the other did, while she joined in with
her voice; and when ’twas come to _Tout est perdue_, she did repeat it
over twice. Then turning to the other side of the bed, she cried to her
friends: “Yes! all is lost this bout, and for good and all,” and so
died. Truly a death we may call gay and pleasant! This tale I have of
two of her companions, persons of credit, who saw the mystery played
out.

If then there be women which do die of joy and in joyous wise, no less
are men to be found which have done the like. Thus we read of that
great Pope, Leo X., how he did die of joy and delight, when he beheld
us Frenchmen driven out altogether from the State of Milan; so sore a
hate he bare us!

The late Grand Prior, M. de Lorraine, did one time conceive the wish
to send a pair of his Galleys on an expedition to the Levant under the
command of Captain Beaulieu, one of his Lieutenants, of the which I
have spoke somewhat in another place. Beaulieu went readily enough,
being a brave and valiant sailor. When he was toward the Archipelago,
he did fall in with a great Venetian ship, well armed and well found,
which he set him to fire upon. But the ship did return his salute to
some purpose; for at the first volley she did carry clean away two of
his banks of oars, galley-slaves and all. Amongst other sore wounded
was his Lieutenant, a man named Captain Panier (“Basket”) and a good
fellow enough, which had time to cry out this word only before he died:
“Good-bye baskets all, the harvest is done,”—a merry and a pleasant
jest to enliven his death withal! The end was, M. de Beaulieu had to
retire, this big ship proving beyond his power to overcome.

The first year King Charles IX. was King, at the time of the July edict
when he was yet residing in the Faubourg St. Germain, we did see the
hanging of a certain gallows-bird in that quarter, which had stolen six
silver goblets from the kitchen of the Prince de La Roche-sur-Yonne.
So soon as he was on the ladder, he did beg the hangman to grant
him a little space for a dying speech, and did take up his parable,
remonstrating with the folk and telling them he was unjustly put to
death, “for never,” said he, “have I practised my thievings on the
poor, on beggars and the vulgar herd, but only on Princes and great
Lords, which be greater thieves than we, and do rob us every day of
their lives; and ’tis a good deed to recover again of these folk what
they do rob and filch from us.” Much more diverting nonsense of
the sort he did utter, the which ’twere but wasted time to repeat.
Presently the priest which was with him at the top of the ladder,
turning to the people, as we see done, did call upon them: “Good sirs!
this poor criminal doth recommend himself to your prayers; we will say
all together for him and his soul’s peace a _Pater noster_ and an _Ave
Maria_, and will sing a _Salve_.” Then just as the folk were answering,
the said poor criminal did drop his head, and fixing his eyes on the
priest, did start bellowing like a calf, and making mock of the priest
in the most absurd fashion; then lending him a kick, did send him
flying from the top of the ladder to the bottom, so big a leap that
he brake a leg. “Ah, ha! Sir priest!” cried the fellow, “God’s truth,
I knew I should shift you. Well! you’ve got your gruel now, my fine
fellow.” Hearing him groan, he did set up a loud and hearty guffaw;
then this ended, did jump off the ladder of his own motion and set
himself a-swinging into space. I dare swear the Court did laugh merrily
at the trick, albeit the poor priest had done himself a serious hurt. A
death, in good sooth, that can scarce be called grave and melancholy!

The late deceased M. d’Estampes had a fool called Colin, a very
diverting fellow. When his death was now nigh, his master did enquire
how Colin was doing. They told him, “But poorly, my Lord; he is going
to die, for he will take nothing.”—“Come now,” said M. d’Estampes, who
was at the moment at table, “take him this soup, and tell him, an if
he will not take somewhat for love of me, I will never love him more,
for they inform me he will take naught.” The message was delivered to
Colin, who, death already ’twixt the teeth of him, did make answer,
“And who be they which have told my Lord I would take naught?” Then
being surrounded by a countless cloud of flies (for ’twas summer time),
he began to hunt them with his hand, as we see pages and lackeys and
children do, a-trying to catch them; and having taken two with one
swoop, he cried, making a funny gesture more readily imagined than
described, “Go tell my Lord,” said he, “what I have taken for love of
him, and that now I’m away to the kingdom of the flies,” and so saying
and turning him round to the other side of the bed, the merry rascal
did expire.

As to this, I have heard sundry philosophers declare that folk do very
often at the moment of death remember them of those things they have
the most loved in life, and tell of these; so gentlemen, soldiers,
sportsmen, artisans, all in fact, very near, according to their former
occupation, do say some word thereof when a-dying. This is a fact often
noted no less in past time than at the present day.

Women in like wise do often out with a similar rigmarole,—whores just
as much as honest dames. So have I heard speak of a certain lady, of
very good quality too, which on her death-bed did exult to spit out
all about her divers intrigues, naughtinesses and past pleasures,
to such purpose that she told more thereof than ever folk had known
before, albeit she had always been suspected as a desperate wanton.
This revelation she may have made, either in a dream possibly, or else
because truth, that can never be hid, did constrain her thereto, or
mayhap because she was fain so to discharge her conscience. Anyhow, she
did actually, with clear conscience and true repentance, confess and
ask forgiveness for her sins, detailing them each and all, dotting
i’s and crossing t’s, till all was as clear as day. Verily, a curious
thing, she should have found leisure at that supreme hour so to be
sweeping her conscience clean of such a muckheap of scandal,—and with
such careful particularity.

Another good lady I have heard of which was so apt to dream every
night, as that she would tell out by night everything she did by day,
in such wise that she did bring sore suspicion of herself on her
husband’s part, who did presently set himself to listen to her talking
and prattling and pay heed to her dreams, whereby an ill fate did later
on befall her.

’Tis no long while since a gentleman of the great world, belonging
to a province I will not name, did the same thing on his death-bed,
publishing abroad his loves and lecheries, and specifying the ladies,
wives and maids, which he had had to do with, and in what places, and
how and under what circumstances. All this he did confess loud out,
asking God’s pardon therefor before everybody. This last did worse
than the woman just mentioned, for whereas she did bring disrepute on
herself only, he did blacken several fair ladies’ good name. A fine
pair of gallants truly!

’Tis said that misers, both male and female, have likewise this trick
of thinking much, in the hour of death, on their hoard of crowns,
forever talking of the same. Some forty years agone there was a certain
lady of Mortemar,[55*] one of the richest ladies in all Poitou and one
of the most moneyed, which afterward when she came to die had never a
thought for aught but her crowns that were in her closet. All the time
of her sickness, she would rise from her bed twenty times a day to go
visit her treasure. At the last, when she was now very nigh her end
and the priest was exhorting her to think of the life eternal, she
would make no other reply nor say any other word but only this: “Give
me my gown; the villains are robbing me.” Her one thought was to rise
and visit her strong-room, as she did sore strive to do, but the effort
was beyond the poor lady. And so she died.

I have let myself toward the end wander a little away from the first
intention of my present Discourse; but we should bear in mind that
after preaching and tragedy, farce ever cometh next. With this word, I
make an end.




       [Illustration: Decorative scrollwork above chapter start]




                         SIXTH DISCOURSE[56*]

          Of how we should never speak ill of ladies, and of
                     the consequences of so doing.


                                  1.

One point there is to be noted in these fair and honourable dames
which do indulge in love, to wit that whatsoever freedom they do allow
themselves, they will never willingly suffer offence or scandal to
be said of them by others, and if any do say ill of them, they know
very well how to avenge the affront sooner or later. In a word, they
be ready enough to do the thing, but unwilling it should be spoken
about. And in very sooth ’tis not well done to bring ill repute on an
honourable lady, nor to divulge on her; for indeed what have a number
of other folks to do with it, an if they _do_ please their senses and
their lovers’ to boot?

The Courts of our French Kings, and amongst others, those of later
years in especial, have been greatly given to blazon abroad the faults
of these worthy dames; and I have known the days when was never a
gallant about the Palace but did discover some falsehood to tell
against the ladies, or at least find some true though scandalous tale
to repeat. All this is very blameworthy; for a man ought never to
offend the honour of fair ladies, and least of all great ladies. And I
do say this as well to such as do reap enjoyment of ladies’ favour, as
to them which cannot taste the venison, and for this cause do decry the
same.

The Courts of our later Kings have, I repeat it, been overmuch given to
this scandal-mongering and tale-bearing,—herein differing widely from
those of earlier Sovereigns, their predecessors, alway excepting that
of Louis XI., that seasoned reprobate. Of him ’tis said that most times
he would eat at a common table, in open Hall, with many gentlemen of
his privy household and others withal; and whoever could tell him the
best and most lecherous story of light women and their doings, this man
was best welcomed and made most of. Himself, too, showed no scruple to
do the like, for he was exceeding inquisitive and loved to be informed
of all secrets; then having found these out, he would often divulge the
same to companions, and that publicly.[57] This was indeed a very grave
scandal. He had a most ill opinion of women, and an entire disbelief
in their chastity. After inviting the King of England to Paris on a
visit of good fellowship, and being taken at his word by that Prince,
he did straight repent him, and invented an _alibi_ to break off the
engagement. “Holy Christ!” he said on this occasion, “I don’t want him
coming here. He would certainly find some little smart, dainty minx,
that he would fall over head and ears in love with, who would tempt him
to stay longer and come oftener than I should at all like.”

Natheless of his wife[57] he had a very high opinion, who was a very
modest and virtuous lady; and truly she had need be so, for else,
being a distrustful and suspicious Prince if ever there was one, he
would very soon have treated her like the rest. And when he died,
he did charge his son to love and honour his mother well, but not
to be ruled of her,—“not that she was not both wise and chaste,” he
declared, “but that she was more Burgundian than French.”[58*] And
indeed he did never really love her but to have an heir of her; and
when he had gotten this, he made scarce any account of her more. He
kept her at the Castle of Amboise like a plain Gentlewoman in very
scanty state and as ill-dressed as any young country girl. There he
would leave her with few attendants to say her prayers, while himself
was away travelling and taking his pleasure elsewhere. I leave you to
imagine, such being the opinion the King held of women, and such his
delight in speaking ill of them, how they were maltreated by every
evil tongue at Court. Not that he did otherwise wish them ill for so
taking their pleasure, nor that he desired to stop their amusements
at all, as I have seen some fain to do; but his chiefest joy was to
gird at them, the effect being that these poor ladies, weighed down
under such a load of detraction, were often hindered from kicking of
their heels so freely as they would else have liked to do. Yet did
harlotry much prevail in his day; for the King himself did greatly help
to establish and keep up the same with the gentlemen of his Court.
Then was the only question, who could make the merriest mock thereat,
whether in public or in privity, and who could tell the merriest tales
of the ladies’ wantonings and _wriggles_ (this was his phrase) and
general naughtiness. True it is the names of great ladies were left
unmentioned, such being censured only by guess-work and appearances;
and I ween they had a better time than some I have seen in the days
of the late King, which did torment and chide and bully them most
strangely. Such is the account I have heard of that good monarch, Louis
XI., from divers old stagers.

At any rate his son, King Charles VIII., which did succeed him, was
not of this complexion; for ’tis reported of him now that he was the
most reticent and fair-speaking monarch was even seen, and did never
offend man or woman by the very smallest ill word.[59] I leave you
then to think of the fair ladies of his reign, and all merry lovers of
the sex, did not have good times in those days. And indeed he did love
them right well and faithfully,—in fact too well; for returning back
from his Naples expedition triumphant and victorious, he did find such
excessive diversion in loving and fondling the same, and pleasuring
them with so many delights at Lyons, in the way of tournaments and
tourneys which he did hold for love of them, that clean forgetting his
partisans which he had left in that Kingdom, he did leave these to
perish,—and towns and kingdom and castles to boot, which yet held out,
and were stretching forth hands of supplication to him to send them
succour. ’Tis said moreover that overmuch devotion to the ladies was
the cause of his death, for by reason of a too reckless abandonment
to these pleasures, he did, being of a very weakly frame of body, so
enervate and undermine his health as that this behaviour did no little
contribute to his death.

Our good King Louis XII. was very respectful toward the ladies; for as
I have said in another place, he would ever pardon all stage-players,
as well as scholars and clerks of the Palace in their guilds, no matter
who they did make free to speak of, excepting the Queen his wife, and
her ladies and damosels,—albeit he was a merry gallant in his day and
did love fair women as well as other folk. Herein he did take after
his grand-father, Duke Louis of Orleans,—though not in this latter’s
ill tongue and inordinate conceit and boastfulness. And truly this
defect did cost him his life, for one day having boasted loud out at
a banquet whereat Duke John of Burgundy, his cousin, was present, how
that he had in his private closet portraits of all the fairest ladies
he had enjoyed, as chance would have it, Duke John himself did enter
this same closet. The very first lady whose picture he beheld there,
and the first sight that met his eyes, was his own most noble lady
wife, which was at that day held in high esteem for her beauty. She was
called Marguerite, daughter of Albert of Bavaria, Count of Hainault
and Zealand. Who was amazed then? who but the worthy husband? Fancy
him muttering low down to himself, “Ha, ha! I see it all!” However,
making no outcry about the flea that really bit him, he did hide it
all, though hatching vengeance, be sure, for a later day, and so picked
a quarrel with him as to his regency and administration of the Kingdom.
Thus putting off his grievance on this cause and not on any matter of
his wife at all, he had the Duke assassinated at the Porte Barbette of
Paris. Then presently his first wife being now dead (we may suspect
by poison), and right soon after, he did wed in the second place the
daughter of Louis, third Duke of Bourbon. Mayhap this bargain was no
better than his first; for truly with folks which be meet for horns,
change bed-chamber and quarters as they may, they will ever encounter
the same.

The Duke in this matter did very wisely, so to avenge him of his
adultery without setting tongues a-wagging of his concerns or his
wife’s, and ’twas a judicious piece of dissimulation on his part.
Indeed I have heard a very great nobleman and soldier say, how that
there be three things a wise man ought never to make public, an if he
be wronged therein. Rather should he hold his tongue on the matter,
or better still invent some other pretext to fight upon and get his
revenge,—unless that is the thing was so clear and manifest, and so
public to many persons, as that he could not possibly put off his
action onto any other motive but the true one.

The first is, when ’tis brought up against a man that he is cuckold and
his wife unfaithful; another, when he is taxed with buggery and sodomy;
the third, when ’tis stated of him that he is a coward, and that he
hath basely run away from a fight or a battle. All three charges be
most shameful, when a man’s name is mentioned in connection therewith;
so he doth fight the accusation, and will sometimes suppose he can well
clear himself and prove his name to have been falsely smirched. But the
matter being thus made public, doth cause only the greater scandal;
and the more ’tis stirred, the more doth it stink, exactly as vile
stench waxeth worse, the more it is disturbed. And this is why ’tis
always best, if a man can with honour, to hold his tongue, and contrive
and invent some new motive to account for his punishment of the old
offence; for such like grievances should ever be ignored so far as may
be, and never brought into court, or made subjects of discussion or
contention. Many examples could I bring of this truth; but ’twould be
over irksome to me, and would unduly lengthen out my Discourse.

So we see Duke John was very wise and prudent thus to dissimulate and
hide his horns, and on quite other grounds take his revenge on his
cousin, which had shamed him. Else had he been made mock of, and his
name blazoned abroad. No doubt dread of such mockery and scandal did
touch him as nigh at heart as ever his ambition, and made him act like
the wise and experienced man of the world he was.

Now, however, to return from the digression which hath delayed me,
our King Francis I., who was a good lover of fair ladies, and that in
spite of the opinion he did express, as I have said elsewhere, how that
they were fickle and inconstant creatures, would never have the same
ill spoke of at his Court, and was always most anxious they should be
held in all high respect and honour.[60*] I have heard it related how
that one time, when he was spending his Lent at Meudon near Paris,
there was one of the gentlemen in his service there named the Sieur
de Brizambourg, of Saintogne. As this gentleman was serving the King
with meat, he having a dispensation to eat thereof, his master bade him
carry the rest, as we see sometimes done at Court, to the ladies of the
privy company, whose names I had rather not give, for fear of offence.
The gentleman in question did take upon him to say, among his comrades
and others of the Court, how that these ladies not content with eating
of raw meat in Lent, were now eating cooked as well,—and their belly
full. The ladies hearing of it, did promptly make complaint to the
King, which thereupon was filled with so great an anger, as that he did
instantly command the archers of the Palace guard to take the man and
hang him out of hand. By lucky chance the poor gentleman had wind of
what was a-foot from one of his friends, and so fled and escaped in the
nick of time. But an if he had been caught, he would most certainly
have been hanged, albeit he was a man of good quality, so sore was the
King seen to be wroth that time, and little like to go back on his
word. I have this anecdote of a person of honour and credibility which
was present; and at the time the King did say right out, that any man
which should offend the honour of ladies, the same should be hanged
without benefit of clergy.

A little while before, Pope Farnese[61*] being come to Nice, and the
King paying him his respects in state with all his Court and Lords and
Ladies, there were some of these last, and not the least fair of the
company, which did go to the Pope for to kiss his slipper. Whereupon a
gentleman did take on him to say they had gone to beg his Holiness for
a dispensation to taste of raw flesh without sin or shame, whenever
and as much as ever they might desire. The King got to know thereof;
and well it was for the gentleman he did fly smartly, else had he been
hanged, as well for the veneration due to the Pope as for the respect
proper to fair ladies.


                                  2.

These gentlemen were not so happy in their speeches and interviews as
was once the late deceased M. d’Albanie. The time when Pope Clement
did visit Marseilles to celebrate the marriage of his niece with M.
d’Orleans, there were three widow ladies, of fair face and honourable
birth, which by reason of the pains, vexations and griefs they suffered
from the absence of their late husbands and of those pleasures that
were no more, had come so low, and grown so thin, weak and sickly, as
that they did beseech M. d’Albanie, their kinsman, who did possess
a good share of the Pope’s favour, to ask of him dispensation for
the three of them to eat meat on prohibited days. This the said Duke
did promise them to do, and to that end did one day bring them on a
friendly footing to the Pope’s lodging. Meantime he had warned the
King of what was a-foot, telling him he would afford him some sport.
So having put him up to the game, and the three ladies being on their
knees before his Holiness, M. d’Albanie took the word first, saying
in a low tone and in Italian, so that the ladies did not catch his
words: “Holy Father, see here before you three widow ladies, fair to
look on and very well born. These same for the respect they bear toward
their dead husbands and the love they have for the children they have
borne to these, will not for aught in all the world marry again and so
wrong their husbands and children. But whereas they be sometimes sore
tempted by the pricks of the flesh, they do therefore humbly beseech
your Holiness for leave to go with men without marriage, whenever
and wherever they shall find them under the said temptation.”—“What
say you, cousin?” cried the Pope. “Why! ’twould be against God’s own
commandments, wherefrom I can give no dispensation.” “Well! the ladies
are here before you, Holy Father, and if it please you to hear them
say their say.” At this one of the three, taking the word, said: “Holy
Father! we have besought M. d’Albanie to make you our very humble
petition for us three poor women, and to represent to your Holiness our
frailty and our weakly complexion.”—“Nay! my daughters,” replied the
Pope, “but your petition is in no wise reasonable, for the thing would
be clean against God’s commandments.” Then the widows, still quite
ignorant of what M. d’Albanie had told the Pope, made answer: “At the
least, Holy Father, may it please you give us leave three times a week,
without scandal to our name.”—“What!” exclaimed the Pope, “give you
leave to commit _il peccato di lussuria_ (the sin of lasciviousness?).
I should damn mine own soul; I cannot do it!” Hereupon the three
ladies, perceiving at last ’twas a case of scampishness and knavery,
and that M. d’Albanie had played a trick on them, declared, “’Tis not
of that we speak, Holy Father; we but ask permission to eat meat on
prohibited days.”—Hearing these words, the Duc d’Albanie told them,
“Nay! I thought ’twas live flesh you meant, ladies!” The Pope was quick
to understand the knavery put on them, and said with a dawning smile,
“You have put these noble ladies to the blush, my cousin; the Queen
will be angered when she doth hear of it.” The Queen did hear of it
anon, but made no ado, and found the tale diverting. The King likewise
did afterward make good mirth thereof with the Pope; while the Holy
Father himself, after giving them his benediction, did grant them the
dispensation they craved, and dismissed them well content.

I have been given the names of the three ladies concerned, namely:
Madame de Chasteau-Briant or Madame de Canaples, Madame de Chastillon
and the Baillive de Caen, all three very honourable ladies. I have the
tale from sundry old frequenters of the Court.

Madame d’Uzès[62] did yet better, at the time when Pope Paul III. came
to Nice to visit King Francis. She was then Madame du Bellay, and a
lady which hath from her youth up always had merry ways and spake many
a witty word. One day, prostrating herself at his Holiness’ feet,
she did make three supplications to him: first, that he grant her
absolution, for that when yet a little maid, in waiting on the Queen
Regent’s majesty, and called by the name of Tallard, she did lose her
scissors while sewing of her seam, and did make a vow to St. Allivergot
to perform the same, an if she found them. This she presently did, yet
did never accomplish her vow, not knowing where the said Saint’s body
lay. The second petition was that he give her pardon forasmuch as, when
Pope Clement came to Marseilles, she being still Mlle. Tallard, she
did take one of the pillows of his Holiness’ bed, and did wipe herself
therewith in front and in rear, on the which his Holiness did afterward
rest his noble head and face. The third was this, that the Sieur de
Tays, because she did love the same, but he loved not her, and the man
is accursed and should be excommunicated which loveth not again, if he
be loved.

The Pope at first was sore astonished at these requests, but having
enquired of the King who she was, did learn her witty ways, and laughed
heartily over the matter with the King. Yet from that day forth all she
did was found admirable, so good a grace did she display in all her
ways and words.

Now never suppose this same great monarch was so strict and stern in
his respect for ladies, as that he did not relish well enough any good
stories told him concerning them, without however any scandal-mongering
or decrying of their good name. Rather like the great and highly
privileged King he was, he would not that every man, and all the vulgar
herd, should enjoy like privileges with himself.

I have heard sundry relate how he was ever most anxious that the noble
gentlemen of his Court should never be without mistresses. If they
won none such, he did deem them simpletons and empty fools; while many
a time he would ask one Courtier or another the name of the lady of
his choice, and promise to do them good service in that quarter, and
speak well of their merits. So good-natured a Prince was he and an
affable. Oftentimes too, when he did observe his gentlemen full of free
discourse with their mistresses, he would come up and accost them,
asking what merry and gallant words they were exchanging with their
ladies, and if he found the same not to his liking, correcting them
and teaching them better. With his most intimate friends, he was no
wise shy or sparing to tell his stories and share his good things with
them. One diverting tale I have heard him tell, which did happen to
himself, and which he did later on repeat. This was of a certain young
and pretty lady new come to Court, the which being little skilled in
the ways of the world, did very readily yield to the persuasions of the
great folks, and in especial those of the said monarch himself. One day
when he was fain to erect his noble standard and plant the same in her
fort, she having heard it said, and indeed begun to note that when one
gave a thing to the King, or took aught from him and touched it, the
person must first kiss the hand for to take and touch it withal, did
herself without more ado fulfil the obligation and first very humbly
kissing her hand did seize the King’s standard and plant it in the fort
with all due humbleness. Then did she ask him in cold blood, how he
did prefer her to love him, as a respectable and modest lady, or as a
wanton. No doubt he did ask her for the latter, for herein was she more
able to show herself more agreeable than as a modest woman. And indeed
he soon found out she had by no means wasted her time, both after the
event and before it, and all. When all was done, she would drop him
a deep curtsy, thanking him respectfully for the honour he had done
her, whereof she was all unworthy, often suggesting to him at the same
time some promotion for her husband. I have heard the lady’s name, one
which hath since grown much less simple than at first she was, and is
nowadays cunning and experienced enough. The King made no ado about
repeating the tale, which did reach the ears of not a few folks.

This monarch was exceeding curious to hear of the love of both men and
women, and above all their amorous engagements, and in especial what
fine airs the ladies did exhibit when at their gentle work, and what
looks and attitudes they did display therein, and what words they said.
On hearing all this, he would laugh frank and free, but after would
forbid all publishing abroad thereof and any scandal making, always
strongly recommending an honourable secrecy on these matters.

He had for his good follower herein that great, most magnificent
and most generous nobleman, the Cardinal de Lorraine. Most generous
I may well call him, for he had not his like in his day; his free
expenditure, his many gracious gifts and kindnesses, did all bear
witness thereof, and above all else his charity toward the poor. He
would regularly bear with him a great game-bag, the which his valet
of the bed-chamber, who did govern his petty cash, never failed to
replenish, every morning, with three or four hundred crowns. And as
many poor folk as he met, he would plunge his hand in the game-bag,
and whatsoever he drew out therefrom, without a moment’s thought, he
gave away, and without any picking or choosing. ’Twas of him a poor
blind man, as the Cardinal was passing in the streets of Rome and was
asked for an alms, and so did throw him according to wont a great
handful of gold, said thus, crying out aloud in the Italian tongue: _O
tu sei Christo, o veramente el cardinal di Lorrena_,—“Either you are
Christ, or the Cardinal de Lorraine.” Moreover if he was generous and
charitable in this way, he was no less liberal toward other folks as
well, and chiefly where fair ladies were concerned, whom he did easily
attach to him by this regale. For money was not so greatly abundant
in those days as it hath nowadays become, and for this cause women
were more eager after the same, and every sort of merry living and gay
attire.

I have heard it said that ever on the arrival at Court of any fair
damsel or young wife that was handsome and attractive, he would come
instantly to greet the same, and discoursing with her would presently
offer to undertake the training of her. A pretty trainer for sooth!
I ween the task was not so irksome an one as to train and break some
wild colt. Accordingly ’twas said at that time, was scarce dame or
damsel resident at Court or newly come thither, but was caught and
debauched by dint of her own avariciousness and the largesse of the
aforesaid Cardinal; and few or none have come forth of that Court women
of chastity and virtue. Thus might their chests and big wardrobes be
seen for that time more full of gowns and petticoats, of cloth of gold
and silver and of silk, than be nowadays those of our Queens and great
Princesses of the present time. I know this well, having seen the thing
with mine own eyes in two or three instances,—fair ladies which had
gotten all this gear by their dainty body; for neither father, mother
nor husband could have given them the same in anything like such wealth
and abundance.

Nay! but I should have refrained me, some will say, from stating so
much of the great Cardinal, in view of his honoured cloth and most
reverend and high estate. Well! his King would have it so, and did find
pleasure therein; and pleasure one’s Sovereign, a man is dispensed of
all scruple, whether in making love or other matters, provided always
they be not dishonourable. Accordingly he did make no ado about going
to the wars, and hunting and dancing, taking part in mascarades, and
the like sports and pastimes. Moreover he was a man of like flesh
and blood with other folk, and did possess many great merits and
perfections of his own, enough surely to outweigh and cloak this small
fault,—if fault it is to be called, to love fair ladies!

I have heard the following tale told of him in connection with the
proper respect due to ladies. He was naturally most courteous toward
them; yet did he once forget his usual practice, and not without
reason enough, with the Duchess of Savoy, Donna Beatrix of Portugal.
Travelling on one occasion through Piedmont, on his way to Rome on his
Royal master’s service, he did visit the Duke and Duchess. After having
conversed a sufficient while with the Duke, he went to find the noble
Duchess in her chamber for to pay his respects to her; arrived there
and on his coming forward toward her, her Grace, who was haughtiness
itself, if ever was such in the world, did offer him her hand to kiss.
The Cardinal, loath to put up with this affront, did press forward to
kiss her on the mouth, while she did draw back all she could. Then
losing all patience and crowding up yet nearer to her, he takes her
fairly by the head, and in spite of her struggles did kiss her two or
three times over. And albeit she did protest sore with many cries and
exclamations both in Portuguese and Spanish, yet had she to endure this
treatment. “What!” the Cardinal cried out; “is it to me this sort of
state and ceremony is to be used? I do kiss right enough the Queen of
France my Mistress, which is the greatest Queen in all the world, and
I am not to kiss you, a dirty little slip of a duchess! I would have
you to know I have bedded with ladies as fair as you, and as good to
boot, and of better birth than ever you be.” And mayhap he spoke but
the truth. Anyway the Princess was ill-advised to make this show of
haughtiness toward a Prince of so high an house, and above all towards
a Cardinal; for there is never one of this exalted rank in the Church,
but doth liken himself with the greatest Princes of Christendom. The
Cardinal too was in the wrong to take so harsh reprisals; but ’tis ever
very irksome to a noble and generous spirit, of whatever estate and
calling, to put up with an affront.

Another of the same rank, the Cardinal de Granvelle, did likewise well
know how to make the Comte d’Egmont feel his displeasure on the same
account, and others too whose names be at the tip of my pen, but whom
I will pass over for fear of confusing my subject overmuch, though I
may return again to them later. I do now confine myself to our late
King Henri le Grand, which monarch was exceeding respectful to the
ladies, whom he was used to treat with all reverence, and did alway
hate gainsayers of their honour. And when so great King doth so serve
fair ladies, a monarch of such puissance and repute, very loath for
sure be all men of his Court to open mouth for to speak ill of the
same. Beside, the Queen mother did exert a strong hand to guard her
ladies and damsels, and make calumniators and satirists feel the weight
of her resentment, when once they were found out, seeing how she had
been as little spared by such as any of her ladies. Yet ’twas never
herself she did take heed for so much as others, seeing, she was used
to declare, how she did know her soul and conscience pure and void of
offence, and could afford to laugh at these foul-mouthed writers and
scandal-mongers. “Why! let them say their worst,” she would say, “and
have their trouble for nothing”; yet whenever she did catch them at it,
she knew how to make them smart soundly.

It befell the elder Mlle. de Limeuil, at her first coming to Court,
to compose a satire or lampoon (for she had the gift of witty speech
and writing) on the Court generally, not however so much scandalous in
its matter as diverting in form. Be assured the King’s mother did make
her pay for this well and feel the whip smartly, as well as two of her
comrades which were in the secret to her majesty, through the house
of Turenne, which is allied to that of Boulogne, she would have been
chastised with every ignominy, and this by express order of the King,
who had the most particular and curious dislike of such writings.

I do remember me of an incident connected with the Sieur de Matha,[63*]
a brave and gallant gentleman much loved of the King, and a kinsman
of Madame de Valentinois, which did ever have some diverting quarrel
and complaint against the damsels and dames of the Court, of so merry
a complexion was he. One day having attacked one of the Queen’s maids
of honour, another, known by the name of “big Méray,” was for taking
up the cudgels for her companion. The only reply Matha did vouchsafe
her was this: “Go to! I’m not attacking you, Méray; you’re a great
war-horse, and should be barded!”[64] For insooth she was the very
biggest woman, maid or wife, I have ever seen. She did make complaint
of the speech to the Queen, saying the other had called her a mare and
a great war-horse to be barded. The Queen was so sore angered that
Matha had to quit the Court for some days, spite of all the favour he
had with his kinswoman Madame de Valentinois; and for a month after his
return durst not set foot in the apartment of the Queen and her maids
of honour.

The Sieur de Gersay did a much worse thing toward one of the Queen’s
maids of honour, to whom he was ill-disposed, for to avenge him upon
her, albeit he was never at a loss for ready words; for indeed he
was as good as most at saying a witty thing or telling a good story,
and above all when spreading a scandal, of which art and mystery he
was a past master; only scandal-mongering was at that time strongly
forbidden. One day when he was present at the after dinner assembly
of the Queen along with the other ladies and gentlemen of her Court,
the custom then being that the company should not sit except on the
floor when the Queen was present, de Gersay having taken from the pages
and lackeys a ram’s pizzle they were playing with in the Office Court
of the Palace, sitting down beside her he did slip the same into the
girl’s frock, and this so softly as that she did never notice it,—that
is not until the Queen did proceed to rise from her chair to retire
to her private apartment. The girl, whose name I had better not give,
did straight spring up, and as she rose to her feet, right in front
of the Queen, doth give so lusty a push to the strange plaything she
had about her, as that it did make six or seven good bounces along
the floor, for all the world as though it were fain of its own accord
to give the company a free exhibition and some gratuitous sport. Who
more astonished than the poor girl,—and the Queen to boot, for ’twas
well in front of her with naught to prevent her view? “Mother of God!”
cried the Queen, “and what is that, my child; what would you be at with
that thing?” The unhappy maid of honour, blushing and half fainting
with confusion, began to cry out she knew not what it was, that some
one who did wish her ill had played this horrid trick on her, and how
she thought ’twas none other but de Gersay which had done it. The
latter waiting only to see the beginning of the sport and the first
few bounces, was through the door by now. They sent to call him back,
but he would never come, perceiving the Queen to be so very wroth, yet
stoutly denying the whole thing all the while. So he was constrained
for some days to fly her resentment, and the King’s too; and indeed
had he not been, along with Fontaine-Guérin,[65*] one of the Dauphin’s
prime favourites, he would assuredly have been in sore straits, albeit
naught could ever be proven against him except by guess-work, and
notwithstanding the fact that the King and his courtiers and not a few
ladies could not refrain them from laughing at the incident, though
they durst not show their amusement in view of the Queen’s displeasure.
For was never a lady in all the world knew better than she how to
startle folk with a sudden and sore rebuke.

A certain honourable gentleman of the Court and a maid of honour did
one time, from the good affection they erst had with one another, fall
into hate and sore quarrel; this went so far that one day the young
lady said loud out to him in the Queen’s apartment, the twain being
in talk as to their difference: “Leave me alone, Sir, else I will
tell what you told me.” The gentleman, who had informed her in strict
confidence of something about a very great lady, and fearing ill would
befall him from it, and at the least he would be banished the Court,
without more ado did answer back,—for he was ready enough of speech:
“If you do tell what I have told you, I will tell what I have done to
you.” Who more astonished than the lady at this? yet did she contrive
to reply: “Why! what have you done to me?” The other did reply: “Why!
what have I told you?” Thereupon doth the lady make answer: “Oh! I know
very well what you told me.” To which the other: “Oh! and I know very
well what I did to you.” The lady doth retort, “But I’ll prove quite
clearly what you told me;” and the other: “And I’ll prove clearer still
what I did to you.” At long last, after sticking a long while at this
counterchange of reply and retort in identical form and almost the same
words, they were parted by the gentlemen and ladies there present,
albeit these got much diversion from the dispute.

This disputation having come to the Queen’s ears, the latter was in
great wrath thereanent, and was fain at once to know the words of the
one and the deeds of the other, and did send to summon them. But the
pair of them, seeing ’twas to be made a serious matter, did consult
and straight agree together to say, whenas they did appear before the
Queen, how that ’twas merely a game their so disputing with each other,
and that neither had she been told aught by the gentleman, nor yet
had he done aught to her. So did they balk the Queen, which did none
the less chide and sore blame the courtier, on the ground that his
words were over free and like to make scandal. The man sware to me
twenty times over that, and if they had not so made it up and agreed
in a tale, and the lady had actually revealed the secret he had told
her, which might well have turned to his great injury, he would have
resolutely maintained he had done his will on her, challenging them
to examine her, and if she should not be found virgin, that ’twas
himself had deflowered her. “Well and good!” I answered, “but an if
they had examined her and found her a maid, for she was quite young and
unmarried, you would have been undone, and ’twould have gone hard but
you had lost your life.”—“Body of me!” he did return, “that’s just what
I should have liked the best, that they should have examined the jade.
I was well assured of my tale, for I knew quite well who had deflowered
her, and that another man had been there right enough, though not
I,—to my much regret. So being found already touched and soiled, she
had been undone, and I avenged, and her good name ruined to boot. I
should have got off with marrying her, and afterward ridding me of her,
as I could.” And these be the risks poor maids and wives have to run,
whether they be in the right o’t or the wrong!


                                  3.

I did one time know a lady of very high rank which did actually find
herself pregnant by the act of a very brave and gallant Prince;[66]
’twas said however the thing was done under promise of marriage,
though later the contrary was ascertained to be the case. King Henri
was the first to learn the facts, and was sore vexed thereat, for she
was remotely connected with his Majesty. Any way, without making any
further noise or scandal about the matter, he did the same evening at
the Royal ball, chose her as his partner and lead her out to dance the
torch-dance[66] with him; and afterward did make her dance with another
the _galliard_ and the rest of the “brawls,” wherein she did display
her readiness and dexterity better than ever, while her figure had all
its old grace and was so well arranged for the occasion as that she
gave no sign of her bigness. The end was that the King, who had kept
his eyes fixed on her very strictly all the time, did perceive naught,
no more than if she had not been with child at all, and did presently
observe to a great nobleman, one of his chief familiars: “The folk
were most ill-advised and spiteful to have gone about to invent the
tale that yonder poor girl was big with child; never have I seen her
in better grace. The spiteful authors of the calumny have told a most
wicked falsehood.” Thus this good King did shield the noble lady and
poor girl, and did repeat the same thing to his Queen whenas he was to
bed with her that night. But the latter, mistrusting the thing, did
have her examined the next morning, herself being present, and she was
found to be six months gone in pregnancy; after she did confess and
avow the whole truth to the Queen, saying ’twas done under pretence of
marriage to follow. Natheless the King, who was all good nature, had
the secret kept as close as ever possible, so as not to bring shame and
scandal on the damsel, though the Queen for her part was very wrathful.
Any way, they did send her off very quietly to the home of her nearest
kinsfolk, where she was presently brought to bed of a fine boy. Yet was
the lad so unfortunate that he could never get him recognized by his
putative father; the trial of the case did drag out to great length,
but the mother could never get aught decided in her favour.

Now good King Henri did love merry tales as well as any of his
predecessors, but he would never have scandal brought on ladies therein
nor their secrets divulged. In fact, the King himself, who was of
amorous complexion enough, when he was away to visit the ladies, would
ever go thither stealthily and under cover all ever he could, to the
end they might be free of suspicion and ill-repute. But an if there was
any that was discovered, ’twas never by his fault or with his consent,
but rather by the fair dame’s doing. So have I heard of one lady of the
sort, of a good house, named Madame Flamin,[67*] a Scotswoman, which
being gotten with child by the King, did make no sort of secret of it,
but would say it out boldly in her French Scotch thus: “I hae dune what
I could, sae that the noo, God be thankit, I am wi’ bairn by the King,
whilk doth mak me an honoured and unco happy woman. And I maun say the
blude Royal hath in it something of a more douce and tasty humour than
the ordinar, I do find myself in sic gude case,—no to speak of the fine
bits o’ presents forthcoming.”

Her son,[68*] that she had presently, was the late Grand Prior of
France, who was killed lately at Marseilles,—a sore pity, for he was
a very honourable, brave and gallant nobleman, and did show the same
clearly at his death. Moreover he was a man of property and sense, and
the least tyrannical Governor of a District of his own day or since.
Provence could tell us that, and beside that he was a right magnificent
Seigneur and of a generous expenditure. He was indeed a man of means,
good sense and wise moderation.

The said lady, with others I have heard of, held the opinion that to
lie with one’s Sovereign was no disgrace; those be harlots indeed which
do abandon their bodies to petty folk, but not where great Kings and
gallant gentlemen be in question. Like that Queen of the Amazons I have
named above, which came a journey of three hundred leagues for to be
gotten with child by Alexander the Great, to have good issue therefrom.
Yet there be those who say one man is as good as another for this!

After King Henri came Francis II., whose reign however was so short as
that spiteful folks had no time even to begin speaking ill of ladies.
Not that we are to believe, if he had enjoyed a long reign, that he
would have suffered aught of the kind at his Court; for he was a
monarch naturally good-natured, frank, and not one to take pleasure
in scandal, as well as being most respectful toward ladies and very
ready to pay them all honour. Beside he had the Queen his wife and the
Queen his mother, and his good uncles to boot, all of which were much
for checking these chatterers and loose-tongued gentry. I remember me
how once, the King being at Saint-Germain en Laye, about the month of
August or September, the fancy took him one evening to go see the
stags in their rut in that noble forest of Saint-Germain, and he did
take with him certain princes, his chief familiars, and some great
ladies, both wives and maids, whose names I could very well give, an if
I chose. Nor was there lacking one fain to make a talk of it, and say
this did not smack of his womankind being exactly virtuous or chaste,
to be going to see these lovemakings and wanton ruttings of beasts,
seeing how the appetite of Venus must heat them more and more at sight
of such doings. In fact, so sore will they be longing to taste, that
sure the water or saliva will be coming to their mouth, in such wise
that no other remedy will there be thereafter for to get rid of the
same except only by some other discharge of saliva, or something else.
The King heard of this speech, and the noblemen and ladies which had
accompanied him thither. Be well assured, an if the gentleman had not
straightway decamped, he had fared very ill; nor did he ever again
appear at Court till after that King’s death and the end of his reign.
Many scandalous pamphlets there were put forth against them which
were then in direction of the Government of the Kingdom; but there
was never an one that did so hurt and offend as a satire entitled
_The Tiger_[69]—modelled on the first invective of Cicero against
Catiline,—especially as it spake freely of the amours of a very great
and fair lady, and a great nobleman, her kinsman. An if the gallant
author had been caught, though he had had an hundred thousand lives,
he had surely lost them every one; for the two great folks, lady and
gentleman, were so exceeding vexed and angered as that they did all but
die of despair.

This King Francis II. was not subject to love like his predecessors;
and truly he would have been greatly to blame, seeing he had to wife
the fairest woman in all the world and the most amiable. And when a man
hath such a wife, he doth not go seeking fortune elsewhere as others
use, else is he a wretch indeed. And not so going, little recks he to
speak ill of ladies, or indeed to speak well either, or to speak at all
about them, except always of his own good lady at home. ’Tis a doctrine
I have heard a very honourable personage maintain: natheless have I
known it prove false more than once.

King Charles came next to the throne, which by reason of the tenderness
of his years, did pay no heed at the beginning of his reign to the
ladies, but did rather give his thoughts to spending his time in
youthful sports and exercises. Yet did the late deceased M. de Sipierre
his Governour and Tutor,[70*] a man who was in my opinion and in that
of every one else, the most honourable and most courteous gentleman of
his time, and the most gentle and respectful toward women, did so well
teach the same lesson to the King his master and pupil, as that he was
as ready to honour ladies as any of the kings his predecessors. For
never, whether as boy or man, did he see a woman, no matter how busied
he was in other matters, whether he was hurrying on or standing still,
on foot or on horse-back, but he would straight salute the same and
most respectfully doff his cap. Whenas he came to an age for love, he
did serve several very honourable dames and damsels I have known of,
but all this with so great honour and respect as that he might have
been the humblest gentleman of the Court.

In his reign the great lampoonists did first begin their vogue, and
amongst them even some very gallant gentlemen of the Court, whose
names I will not give, did strangely abuse the ladies, both in general
and in particular, and even some of the greatest in the land. For
this some of them have found themselves entangled in downright fierce
quarrels, and have come off second best,—not indeed that they did avow
the truth, for they did rather always deny they had aught to do with
it. If they had confessed, they had had heavy payment to make, and the
King would certainly have let them feel the weight of his displeasure,
inasmuch as they did attack ladies of over high a rank. Others did
show the best face they could, and did suffer the lie to be cast in
their teeth a thousand times over, conditionally as we may say and
vaguely, and had to swallow a thousand affronts, drinking the same in
as sweetly as though they had been milk, without daring to retort one
word, else had their lives been at risk. ’Tis a thing which hath oft
given me great surprise that suchlike folks should set them to speak
ill of their neighbours, yet suffer others to speak ill of themselves
so sorely and to their very face. Yet had these men the repute of being
gallant swordsmen; but in this matter they would aye endure all but the
extremest insult bravely and without one word of protest.

I do remember me of a lampoon which was made against a very great lady,
a widow, fair and of most honourable birth, which did desire to marry
again with a very great Prince, a young and handsome man.[71] There
were certain persons, (and I have accurate knowledge of the same), who
disliking this marriage, and to dissuade the Prince therefrom, did
concoct a lampoon on her, the most scandalous I have ever seen, in the
which they did compare her to five or six of the chiefest harlots of
Antiquity, and the most notorious and wanton, declaring how that she
did overtop them each and all. The actual authors of the said satire
did present it to the Prince, professing however that it did emanate
from others, and that themselves had merely been given it. The Prince,
having looked at it, gave the lie to its statements and hurled a
thousand vague and general insults at them which had writ it; yet did
they pass all over in silence, brave and valiant men though they were.
The incident however did give the Prince pause a while, seeing the
lampoon did contain several definite revelations and point direct at
some unpleasant facts; natheless after the lapse of two years more was
the marriage accomplished.

The King was so great-hearted and kindly that he was never inclined
to favour folks of this kidney. To pass a spicy word or two with them
aside, this he did like well enough; but he was always most unwilling
the common herd should be fed on such diet, declaring that his Court,
which was the best ennobled and most illustrious by reason of great
and noble ladies of any in all the world, should never, such being its
high repute, be cheapened and foully aspersed by the mouth of suchlike
reckless and insolent babblers. ’Twas well enough to speak so of the
courtesans of Rome, or Venice, or other the like places, but not of
the Court of France; it might be permitted to do the thing, it was not
permitted to speak thereof.

Thus do we see how this Sovereign was ever respectful toward ladies,
nay! so much so that in his later days when some I know of were fain to
give him an evil impression of certain very great, as well as most fair
and honourable dames, for that these had intermeddled in some highly
important matters of his concern, yet would he never credit aught
against them; but did accord them as good favour as ever, dying at the
last in their very good graces and with many a tear of their shedding
to wet his corpse. And they did find good cause to say so too, so soon
as ever King Henri III. came to succeed him, who by reason of sundry
ill reports he had been told of these ladies when in Poland, did not
make near so much of them as he had done aforetime. Both over these
and over some others that I know of, he did exercise a very strict
censorship, and one we may be sure that made him not more liked; and
indeed I do believe they did him no little hurt, and contributed in
part to his evil fortune and final ruin. I could allege sundry special
facts in proof hereof, but I had rather pass them over,—saying only
this much, that women generally are keen set on taking vengeance. It
may be long in coming, but they do execute it at the last.[72*] On the
contrary many men’s revenge is just the opposite in its nature, for
ardent and hot enough at its first beginning to deceive all, yet by
dint of temporising and putting off and long delays it doth grow cool
and come to naught. And this is why ’tis meet to guard against the
first attempt, and take time by the forelock in parrying the blows; but
with women the first fury and attempt, and the temporising and delay,
do both last out to the end,—that is in some women, though hardly many.

Some have been for excusing the King for the war he made on women in
the way of crying them down, by saying ’twas in order to curb and
correct vice,—as if the curb were of any of the slightest use in these
cases, seeing woman is so conditioned of nature as that the more this
thing is forbid her, the more ardent is she after the same, and to set
a watch on her is just labour lost. So in actual fact myself have seen
how, for all he could do, they were never turned out of their natural
road.

Several ladies that I wot well enough, did he love and serve with all
due respect and very high honour,—and even a certain very great and
fair Princess,[73] of whom he had fallen so deep in love before his
going into Poland, that after he became King, he did resolve to wed the
same, although she was already married to a great and gallant Prince,
but one that was in rebellion against him and had fled to a foreign
land to gather an army and make war upon him. But at the moment of his
return to France, the lady died in child-birth. Her death alone did
hinder the marriage, for he was firm set thereon. He would certainly
have married her by favour and dispensation of the Pope, who would not
have refused him his consent, being so great a Monarch as he was, and
for sundry other reasons that may be readily imagined.

Others again he did make love to only for to bring the same into
disparagement. Of such I wot of one, a great lady, in whose case, for
the displeasures her husband had wrought him, and not able otherwise
to get at him, the King did take his revenge on his wife, whom he did
after publish abroad for what she was in the presence of a number of
folk. Yet was this vengeance mild and merciful after all, for in lieu
of death he did give her life.

Another I wot of, which for overmuch playing the wanton, as also for a
displeasure she did the King, the latter did of set purpose pay court
to. Anon without any vast deal of persuasion, she did grant him an
assignation in a garden, the which he failed not to keep. But he would
have naught else to do with her (so some folk say, but be sure he did
find something to do with her right enough) but only to have her so
seen offering herself in open market, and then to banish her from the
Court with ignominy.

He was anxious and exceeding inquisitive to know the life of all and
every fair lady of his Court, and to penetrate their secret wishes.
’Tis said he did sometimes reveal one or other of his successes with
women to sundry of his most privy intimates. Happy they! for sure the
leavings of suchlike great monarchs must needs be very tasty morsels.

The ladies did fear him greatly, as I have myself seen. He would either
reprimand them personally, when needful, or else beg the Queen his
mother so to do, who on her part was ready enough at the work. ’Twas
not however that she did favour scandal-mongers, as I have shown above
in the little examples I have there given. And paying such heed as she
did to these and showing so great displeasure against them, what was
she not bound to do others which did actually compromise the good name
and honour of her ladies?

This monarch again was so well accustomed from his earliest years,
as myself have seen, to hear tales of ladies and their gallantries
(and truly myself have told him one or two such), and to repeat them
too,—yet alway in secret, for fear the Queen his mother should learn
thereof, for she would never have him tell such stories to any others
than herself, that she might check the same,—so well accustomed was
he to all this, that coming to riper years and full liberty, he did
never lose the habit. And in this wise he did know how they did all
live at his Court and in his Kingdom,—or at the least many of them, and
especially the great ladies of rank, as well as if he had frequented
them every one. And if any there were which were new come to Court,
accosting these most courteously and respectfully, yet would he tell
them over such tales as that they would be utterly amazed at heart to
know where he had gotten all his information, though all the while
denying and protesting against the whole budget to his face. And if he
did divert himself after this fashion, yet did he not fail, in other
and more weighty matters, to apply his visit to such high purpose as
that folk have counted him the greatest King which for an hundred years
hath been in France, as I have writ elsewhere in a chapter composed
expressly upon this Sovereign.[74]

Accordingly I do now say no more about him, albeit it may be objected
to me that I have been but chary of examples of his character on this
point, and that I should say more, an if I be so well informed. Yea!
truly, I do know tales enough, and some of them high-spiced; but I
wish not to be a mere chronicler of news whether of the Court or of
the world at large. Beside, I could never cloak and cover up these my
tales so featly but that folk would see through them, and scandal come
therefrom.

Now these traducers of fair ladies be of divers sorts. Some do speak
ill of women for some displeasure these have done them, though all the
while they be as chaste as any in all the world, and instead of the
pure and beauteous angel they really resemble do make out a picture
of a devil all foul and ugly with wickedness. Thus an honourable
gentleman I have both seen and known, did most abominably defame a very
honourable and virtuous lady for a slight affront she had put upon him,
and did sorely wreak his displeasure on her. He would say thus: “I know
quite well I am in the wrong, and do not deny the lady to be really
most chaste and virtuous. But be it who it may, the woman which shall
have affronted me in the smallest degree, though she were as chaste and
pure as the Blessed Virgin herself, seeing I can in no other way bring
her to book, as I would with a man, I will say every evil gallows thing
I can think of concerning her.” Yet surely God will be angered at such
a wretch.

Other traducers there be, which loving ladies and failing to overcome
their virtue and get aught out of them, do of sheer despite proclaim
them public wantons. Nay! they will do yet worse, saying openly they
have had their will of them, but having known them and found them too
exceeding lustful, have for this cause left them. Myself have known
many gentlemen of this complexion at our French Kings’ Courts. Then
again there is the case of women quitting right out their pretty lovers
and bed favourites, but who presently, following the dictates of their
fickleness and inconstancy, grow sick again and enamoured of others in
their stead; whereupon these same lovers, in despite and despair, do
malign and traduce these poor women, there is no saying how bitterly,
going so far even as to relate detail by detail their naughtinesses and
wanton tricks which they have practised together, and to make known
their blemishes which they have on their naked bodies, to win the
better credence to their tale.

Other men there be which, in despite because ladies do give to others
what they refuse to them, do malign them with might and main, and have
them watched and spied upon and observed, to the end they may afford
the world the greater signs and proofs of their true speaking.

Others again there be, which, fairly stung with jealousy, without other
cause than this, do speak ill of those men whom women love the most,
and of the very women whom they themselves love fondly until they see
their faults fully revealed. And this is one of the chiefest effects of
jealousy. Yet are such traducers not so sore to blame as one would at
first say they were; for this their fault must be set down to love and
jealousy; twin brother and sister of one and the same birth.

Other traducers there be which are so born and bred to backbiting, as
that rather than not backbite some one or other, they will speak ill
of their own selves. Now, think you ’tis likely ladies’ honour will
be spared in the mouth of folks of this kidney? Many suchlike have
I seen at the Courts of our Kings, which being afeared to speak of
men by reason of their sword play, would raise up scandal around the
petticoats of poor weak women, which have no other means of reprisal
but tears, regrets and empty words. Yet have I known not a few which
have come off very ill at this game; for there have been kinsmen,
brothers, friends, lovers of theirs, even husbands, which have made
many repent of their spite, and eat and swallow down their foul words.

Finally, did I but tell of all the diverse sorts of detractors of
ladies, I should never have done.

An opinion I have heard many maintain as to love is this: that a
love kept secret is good for naught, an if it be not in some degrees
manifest,—if not to all, at the least to a man’s most privy friends.
But an if it cannot be told to all, yet at the least must some show be
made thereof, whether by display of favours, wearing of fair ladies’
liveries and colours, or acts of knightly prowess, as tiltings at the
ring, tourneys, mascarades, fights in the lists, even to fights in good
earnest when at the wars. Verily the content of a man is great at
these satisfactions.

For to tell truth, what would it advantage a great Captain to have done
a fine and signal exploit of war, if not a word were said and naught
known thereof? I ween ’twould be a mortal vexation to him. The like
would rightly seem to be the case with lovers which do love nobly,—as
some at any rate maintain. And of this opinion was that prince of
lovers, M. de Nemours, the paragon of all knighthood; for truly if ever
Prince, great Lord or simple gentleman, hath been fortunate in love,
’twas he. He found no pleasure in hiding his successes from his most
privy friends, albeit from the general he did keep the same so secret,
as that only with much difficulty could folk form a judgment thereanent.

In good sooth, for married ladies is the revealing of such matters
highly dangerous. On the other hand for maids and widows, which are to
marry, ’tis of no account; for that the cloak and pretext of a future
marriage doth cover up all sins.

I once knew a very honourable gentleman at Court,[75*] which being
lover of a very great lady, and finding himself one day in company
of a number of his comrades in discourse as to their mistresses, and
agreeing together to reveal the favours received of them to each other,
the said gentleman did all through refuse to declare his mistress,
and did even feign quite another lady to be his dear, and so threw
dust in their eyes,—and this although there was present in the group a
great Prince, which did conjure him to tell the truth, having yet some
suspicion of the secret intrigue he was engaged in. But neither he nor
his companions could draw anything more out of him, although in his
inmost heart he did curse his fate an hundred times over, which had so
constrained him not to reveal, like the rest of them, his success and
triumph, ever more sweet to tell of than defeat.

Another I once knew, and a right gallant gentleman, by reason of his
presumption and overmuch freedom of speech in proclaiming of his
mistress’ name, the which he should have held sacred, as much by signs
and tokens as by actual words, did come parlous near his death in a
murderous attack he but barely escaped from. Yet afterward on another
count he did not so escape the assassins’ swords, but did presently die
of the hurt they gave him.

Myself was at Court in the time of King Francis II. when the Comte
de Saint-Aignan did wed at Fontainebleau with young Madame la
Bourdaisière.[76] Next day, the bridegroom having come into the
King’s apartment, each and all of the courtiers present did begin
to vent their japes on him. Amongst others a certain great Lord and
very gallant soldier did ask him how many stages he had made. The
husband replied five. As it fell out, there was also there present an
honourable gentleman, a Secretary, which was then in the very highest
favour with a very great Princess, whose name I will not give, who
hereupon declared,—’twas nothing much, considering the fair road he
had travelled and the fine weather he had, for it was summer-time. The
great Lord then said to him, “Ho! my fine fellow, you’ld be for having
birds enough to your bag, it seems!”—“And prithee, why not?” retorted
the Secretary. “By God! why! I have taken a round dozen in four and
twenty hours on the most fairest meadow is in all this neighbourhood,
or can be anywhere in all France.” Who more astounded than the said
Lord, who did learn by these words a thing he had longwhile suspected?
And seeing that himself was deep in love with this same Princess, he
was exceeding mortified to think how he had so long hunted in this
quarter without ever getting aught, whereas the other had been so
lucky in his sport. This the Lord did dissimulate for the moment; but
later, after long brooding over his resentment, he had paid him back
hot and strong in his own coin but for a certain consideration that I
prefer not to mention. Yet did he ever after bear him a secret grudge.
Indeed, an if the Secretary had been really well advised, he would
never have so boasted of his bag, but would rather have kept the thing
very secret, especially in so high and brilliant an adventure, whereof
trouble and scandal were exceeding like to arise.

What should we say of a certain gentleman of the great world, which for
some displeasure his mistress had done him, was so insolent as that he
went and showed her husband the lady’s portrait, which she had given
him, and which he carried hung at his neck. The husband did exhibit
no small astonishment, and thereafter showed him less loving toward
his wife, who yet did contrive to gloze over the matter as well as she
could.

Still more to blame was a great Lord I wot of, who disgusted at some
trick his mistress had played on him, did stake her portrait at dice
and lose it to one of his soldiers, for he was in command of a large
company of infantry. Hearing thereof, the lady came nigh bursting with
vexation, and was exceeding angered. The Queen Mother did presently
hear of it, and did reprimand him for what he had done, on the ground
that the scorn put on her was far too extreme, so to go and abandon to
the chance of the dice the portrait of a fair and honourable lady.
But the Lord did soon set the matter in a better light, declaring how
that in his hazard, he had kept back the parchment inside, and had
staked only the box encasing the same, which was of gold and enriched
with precious stones. Myself have many a time heard the tale discussed
between the lady and the said Lord in right merry wise, and have whiles
laughed my fill thereat.

Hereanent will I say one thing: to wit, that there be ladies,—and
myself have known sundry such,—which in their loves do prefer to be
defied, threatened, and eke bullied; and a man will in this fashion
have his way with them better far than by gentle dealings and
complacencies. Just as with fortresses, some be taken by sheer force of
arms, others by gentler means. Yet will no women endure to be reviled
and cried out upon as whores; for such words be more offensive to them
than the things they do represent.

Sulla would never forgive the city of Athens, nor refrain from the
utter overthrow of the same root and branch, not by reason of the
obstinacy of its defence against him, but solely because from the top
of the walls thereof the citizens had foully abused his wife Metella
and touched her honour to the quick.[77*]

In certain quarters, the which I will not name, the soldiery in
skirmishes and sieges of fortified places were used, the one side
against the other, to cast reproach upon the virtue of two of their
sovereign Princesses, going so far as to cry forth one to the other:
“Your Princess doth play ninepins fine and well!”—“And yours is
downright good at a main too!” By dint of these aspersions and bywords
were the said Princesses cause of rousing them to do havoc and commit
cruelties more than any other reason whatever, as I have myself seen.

I have heard it related how that the chiefest motive which did most
animate the Queen of Hungary[78*] to light up those her fierce fires of
rage about Picardy and other regions of France was to revenge sundry
insolent and foul-mouthed gossips, which were forever telling of her
amours, and singing aloud through all the countryside the refrain:

                         Au, au Barbanson,
                         Et la reine d’Ongrie,

—a coarse song at best, and in its loud-voiced ribaldry smacking strong
of vagabond and rustic wit.


                                  4.

Cato could never stomach Cæsar from that day when in the Senate, which
was deliberating as to measures against Catiline and his conspiracy,
Cæsar being much suspected of being privy to the plot, there was
brought in to the latter under the rose a little packet, or more
properly speaking a _billet doux_, the which Servilia, Cato’s sister,
did send for to fix an assignation and meeting place. Cato now no
more doubting of the complicity of Cæsar with Catiline, did cry out
loud that the Senate should order him to show the communication in
question. Thus constrained, Cæsar made the said letter public, wherein
the honour of the other’s sister was brought into sore scandal and open
disrepute. I leave you then to imagine if Cato, for all the fine airs
he did affect of hating Cæsar for the Republic’s sake, could ever come
to like him, in view of this most compromising incident. Yet was it no
fault of Cæsar’s, for he was bound to show the letter, and that on risk
of his life. And I ween Servilia bare him no special ill-will for this;
for in fact and deed they ceased not to carry on still their loving
intercourse, whereof sprang Brutus, whose father Cæsar was commonly
reputed to have been. If so, he did but ill requite his parent for
having given him being.

True it is, ladies in giving of themselves to great men, do run many
risks; and if they do win of the same favours, and high privileges and
much wealth, yet do they buy all these at a great price.

I have heard tell of a very fair lady, honourable and of a good house,
though not of so great an one as a certain great Lord, who was deep in
love with her. One day having found the lady in her chamber alone with
her women, and seated on her bed, after some converse betwixt them and
sundry conceits concerning love, the Lord did proceed to kiss the lady
and did by gentle constraint lay her down upon the bed. Anon coming to
the main issue, and she enduring that same with quiet, civil firmness,
she did say thus to him: “’Tis a strange thing how you great Lords
cannot refrain you from using your authority and privileges upon us
your inferiors. At the least, if only silence were as common with you
as is freedom of speech, you would be but too desirable and excusable.
I do beg you therefore, Sir! to hold secret what you do, and keep mine
honour safe.”

Such be the words customarily employed by ladies of inferior station to
their superiors. “Oh! my Lord,” they cry, “think at any rate of mine
honour.” Others say, “Ah! my dear Lord, an if you speak of this, I am
undone; in Heaven’s name safeguard mine honour.” Others again, “Why!
my good Lord! if only you do say never a word and mine honour be safe,
I see no great objection,” as if wishing to imply thereby a man may do
what he please, an if it be in secret. So other folk know naught about
it, they deem themselves in no wise dishonoured.

Ladies of higher rank and more proud station do say to their gallants,
if inferior to themselves: “Be you exceeding careful not to breathe one
word of the thing, no matter how small. Else it is a question of your
life; I will have you thrown in a sack into the water, or assassinated,
or hamstrung;” such and suchlike language do they hold. In fact there
is never a lady, of what rank soever she be, that will endure to be
evil spoke of or her good name discussed however slightly in the Palace
or in men’s mouths. Yet are there some others which be so ill-advised,
or desperate, or entirely carried away of love, as that without men
bringing any charge against them, they do traduce their own selves. Of
such sort was, no long while agone, a very fair and honourable lady,
of a good house, with the which a great Lord did fall deep in love,
and presently enjoying her favours, did give her a very handsome and
precious bracelet. This she was so ill-advised as to wear commonly on
her naked arm above the elbow. But one day her husband, being to bed
with her, did chance to discover the same; and examining it, found
matter enough therein to cause him to rid him of her by a violent
death. A very foolish and ill-advised woman truly!

I knew at another time a very great and sovereign Prince who after
keeping true to a mistress, one of the fairest ladies of the Court,
by the space of three years, at the end of that time was obliged to go
forth on an expedition for to carry out some conquest. Before starting,
he did of a sudden fall deep in love with a very fair and honourable
Princess, if ever there was one. Then for to show her he had altogether
quitted his former mistress for her sake, and wishing to honour and
serve her in every way, without giving a second thought to the memory
of his old love, he did give her before leaving all the favours,
jewels, rings, portraits, bracelets and other such pretty things which
his former mistress had given him. Some of these being seen and noted
of her, she came nigh dying of vexation and despite; yet did she not
refrain from divulging the matter; for if only she could bring ill
repute on her rival, she was ready to suffer the same scandal herself.
I do believe, had not the said Princess died some while after, that the
Prince, on his coming back from abroad, would surely have married her.

I knew yet another Prince,[79] though not so great an one, which
during his first wife’s lifetime and during his widowhood, did come to
love a very fair and honourable damsel of the great world, to whom he
did make, in their courting and love time, most beautiful presents,
neck-chains, rings, jewels and many other fine ornaments, and amongst
others a very fine and richly framed mirror wherein was set his own
portrait. Well! presently this same Prince came to wed a very fair and
honourable Princess of the great world, who did make him lose all taste
for his first mistress, albeit neither fell aught below the other for
beauty. The Princess did then so work upon and strongly urge the Prince
her husband, as that he did anon send to demand back of his former
mistress all he had ever given her of fairest and most rich and rare.

This was a very sore chagrin to the lady; yet was she of so great and
high an heart, albeit she was no Princess, though of one of the best
houses in France, as that she did send him back all that was most fair
and exquisite, wherein was a beautiful mirror with the picture of the
said Prince. But first, for to decorate the same still better, she did
take a pen and ink, and did scrawl inside a great pair of horns for
him right in the mid of the forehead. Then handing the whole to the
gentleman, the Prince’s messenger, she spake thuswise to him: “Here,
my friend, take this to your master, and tell him I do hereby send him
back all he ever gave me, and that I have taken away nor added naught,
unless it be something he hath himself added thereto since. And tell
yonder fair Princess, his wife, which hath worked on him so strongly
to demand back all his presents of me, that if a certain great Lord
(naming him by name, and myself do know who it was) had done the like
by her mother, and had asked back and taken from her what he had many a
time and oft given her for sleeping with him, by way of love gifts and
amorous presents, she would be as poor in gewgaws and jewels as ever
a young maid at Court. Tell her, that for her own head, the which is
now so loaded at the expense of this same Lord and her mother’s belly,
she would then have to go scour the gardens every morning for to pluck
flowers to deck it withal, instead of jewelry. Well! let her e’en make
what show and use she will of them; I do freely give them up to her.”
Any which hath known this fair lady will readily understand she was
such an one as to have said as much; and herself did tell me she did,
and very free of speech she aye was. Yet could she not fail but feel it
sore, whether from husband or wife, to be so ill treated and deceived.
And the Princess was blamed of many folk, which said ’twas her own
fault, to have so despitefully used and driven her to desperation the
poor lady, the which had well earned such presents by the sweat of her
body.

This lady, for that she was one of the most beautiful and agreeable
women of her time, failed not, notwithstanding she had so sacrificed
her virtue to this Prince, to make a good marriage with a very rich
man, though not her equal in family. So one day, the twain being come
to mutual reproaches as to the honour they had done each the other in
marrying, and she making a point of the high estate she was of and yet
had married him, he did retort, “Nay! but I have done more for you than
you have done for me; for I have dishonoured myself for to recover your
honour for you;” meaning to infer by this that, whereas she had lost
hers when a girl, he had won it back for her, by taking her to wife.

I have heard tell, and I ween on good authority, how that, after King
Francis I. had quitted Madame de Chasteaubriand, his most favourite
mistress, to take Madame d’Etampes, Helly by her maiden name, whom the
Queen Regent had chosen for one of her Maids of Honour and did bring to
the King’s notice on his return from Spain to Bordeaux,—and he did take
her for his mistress, and left the aforesaid Madame de Chasteaubriand,
as they say one nail doth drive out another,—his new mistress Madame
d’Etampes, did beg the King to have back from the Chasteaubriand all
the best jewels which he had given her. Now this was in no wise for
the price or value of the same, for in those days pearls and precious
stones had not the vogue they have since gotten, but for liking of
the graceful mottoes[80*] which had been set, imprinted and engraven
thereon, the which the Queen of Navarre, his sister, had made and
composed; for she was a past mistress of this art. So King Francis
did grant her prayer, and promising he would do this, was as good as
his word. To this end he did send one of his gentlemen to her for to
demand their return, but she on the instant did feign herself sick
and appointed the gentleman to come again in three days’ time, when
he should have what he craved. Meantime, in her despite, she did send
for a goldsmith, and had him melt down all the jewels, without any
regard or thought of the dainty devices which were engraven thereon.
Then anon, when the messenger was returned, she did give him all the
ornaments converted and changed into gold ingots. “Go, carry this,” she
said, “to the King, and tell him that, as it hath pleased his Majesty
to ask back what he did erst so generously give me, I do now return
and send back the same in gold ingots. As for the mottoes and devices,
these I have so well conned over and imprinted on my mind, and do hold
them so dear, as that I could in no wise suffer any other should use or
enjoy the same and have delight therein but myself.”

When the King had received the whole, ingots and message and all, he
made no other remark but only this, “Nay! give her back the whole. What
I was for doing, ’twas not for the worth of the gold (for I would have
gladly given her twice as much), but for liking of the devices and
mottoes; but seeing she hath so destroyed these, I care not for the
gold, and do return it her again. Herein hath she shown more greatness
and boldness of heart than ever I had dreamed could come of a woman.”
A noble-spirited lady’s heart, chagrined so and scorned, is capable of
great things.

These Princes which do so recall their presents act much otherwise
than did once Madame de Nevers, of the house of Bourbon, daughter
of M. de Montpensier.[81*] This same was in her day a very prudent,
virtuous and beautiful Princess, and held for such both in France and
Spain, in which latter country she had been brought up along with Queen
Elisabeth of France, being her cup-bearer and giving her to drink;
for it must be known this Queen was aye served by her gentlewomen,
dames and damsels, and each had her rank and office, the same as we
Courtiers in attendance on our Kings. This Princess was married to
the Comte d’Eu, eldest son of M. de Nevers, she worthy of him as he
was right well worthy of her, being one of the handsomest and most
pleasing Princes of his time. For which cause was he much loved and
sought after of many fair and noble ladies of the Court, amongst others
of one which was both this, and a very adroit and clever woman to
boot. Now it befell one day that the Prince did take a ring from off
his wife’s finger, a very fine one, a diamond worth fifteen hundred
or mayhap two thousand crowns, the which the Queen of Spain had given
her on her quitting her Court. This ring the Prince, seeing how his
mistress did admire it greatly and did show signs of coveting its
possession, being very free-handed and generous, did frankly offer her,
giving her to understand he had won the same at tennis. Nor did she
refuse the gift, but taking it as a great mark of affection, did always
wear it on her finger for love of him. And thus Madame de Nevers,
who did understand from her good husband that he had lost the ring at
tennis, or at any rate that it was lying pawned, came presently to
see the same on the hand of her rival, whom she was quite well aware
was her husband’s mistress. Yet was she so wise and prudent and had
such command of herself, as that, merely changing colour somewhat and
quietly dissembling her chagrin, without any more ado she did turn her
head another way, and did breathe never a word of the matter either to
her husband or his mistress. Herein was she much to be commended, for
that she did show no cross-grained, vixenish temper, nor anger, nor yet
expose the younger lady to public scorn, as not a few others I wot of
would have done, thus delighting the company and giving them occasion
for gossip and scandal-mongering.

Thus we see how necessary is moderation in such matters and how
excellent a thing, as also that here no less than elsewhere doth luck
and ill-luck prevail. For some ladies there be which cannot take one
step aside or make the very smallest stumble in the path of virtue,
or taste of love but with the tip of their finger, but lo! they be
instantly traduced, exposed and satirized right and left.

Others again there be which do sail full before the wind over the sea
and pleasant waters of Venus, and with naked body and wide spread limbs
do swim with wide strokes therein, wantoning in its waves, voyaging
toward Cyprus and the Temple of Venus there and her gardens, and taking
their fill of delight in love; yet deuce a word doth any say about
them, no more than if they had never been born. Thus doth fortune
favour some and mislike others in matter of scandal-making; myself have
seen not a few examples thereof in my day, and some be found still.

In the time of King Charles was writ a lampoon at Fontainebleau, most
base and scurrilous, wherein the fellow did spare neither the Royal
Princesses nor the very greatest ladies nor any others. And verily, an
if the true author had been known, he would have found himself in very
ill case.

At Blois moreover, whenas the marriage of the Queen of Navarre was
arranged with the King, her husband, was made yet another, against
a very great and noble lady, and a most scurrilous one, whereof the
author was never discovered. But there were really some very brave and
valiant gentlemen mixed up therein, which however did carry it off very
boldly and made many loud general denials. So many others beside were
writ, as that naught else was seen whether in this reign or in that of
King Henri III.—and above all one most scurrilous one in the form of a
song, and to the tune of a _coranto_ which was then commonly danced at
Court, and hence came to be sung among the pages and lackeys on every
note, high and low.


                                  5.

In the days of our King Henri III. was a yet worse thing done. A
certain gentleman, whom I have known both by name and person, did one
day make a present to his mistress of a book of pictures, wherein were
shown two and thirty ladies of high or middling rank about the Court,
painted in true colours, a-bed and sporting with their lovers, who were
likewise represented and that in the most natural way. Some had two or
three lovers, some more, some less; and these thirty-two ladies did
figure forth more than seven and twenty of the figures or _postures_
of Aretino, and all different. The actors were so well represented
and so naturally, as that they did seem actually to be speaking and
doing. While some were disrobed, other were shown clad in the very same
clothes, and with the same head-dresses, ornaments and weeds as they
were commonly to be seen wearing. In a word, so cunningly was the book
wrought and painted that naught could be more curious; and it had cost
eight or nine hundred crowns, and was illuminated throughout.

Now this lady did show it one day and lend it to another, her comrade
and bosom friend, which latter was much a favourite and familiar of
a great Lady that was in the book, and one of the most vividly and
vigorously represented there; so seeing how much it concerned herself,
she did give her best attention. Then being curious of all experience,
she was fain to look it over with another, a great lady, her cousin and
chiefest friend, who had begged her to afford her the enjoyment of the
sight, and who was likewise in the pictures, like the rest.

So the book was examined very curiously and with the greatest care,
leaf by leaf, without passing over a single one lightly, so that they
did spend two good hours of the afternoon at the task. The fair ladies,
far from being annoyed or angered thereat, did find good cause for
mirth therein, seeing them to admire the pictures mightily, and gaze at
them fixedly.

These two dames were bolder and more valiant and determined than one
I have heard tell of, who one day looking at this same book with
two others of her friends, so ravished with delight was she and did
enter into such an ecstasy of love and so burning a desire to imitate
these same luscious pictures, as that she cannot see out of her eyes
till the fourth page, and at the fifth did fall in a dead faint. A
terrible swoon truly! very different to that of Octavia, sister of
Cæsar Augustus, who one day hearing Virgil recite the three verses he
had writ on her dead son Marcellus (for which she did give him three
thousand crowns for the three alone) did incontinently swoon right
away. That was love indeed, but of how different a sort!

I have heard tell, in the days when I was at Court, of a great Prince
of the highest rank, old and well stricken in years, and who ever since
the loss of his wife had borne him very continently in his widowhood,
as indeed was but consistent with his high repute for sanctity of life.
At last he was fain to marry again with a very fair, virtuous and young
Princess. But seeing how for the ten years he had been a widower he
had never so much as touched a woman, and fearing to have forgot the
way of it (as though it were an art that a man may forget), and to get
a rebuff the first night of his wedlock, and perform naught of his
desire, was anxious to make a previous essay. So by dint of money he
did win over a fair young maid, a virgin like the wife he was to marry;
nay more, ’tis said he had her chosen to resemble somewhat in features
his future wife. Fortune was so kind to him that he did prove he had by
no means forgot as yet his old skill; and his essay was so successful
that, bold and happy, he did advance to his wife’s fortress, and won
good victory and high repute.

This essay was more successful than that of another gentleman whose
name I have heard, whom his father, although he was very young and much
of a simpleton, did desire should marry. Well! first of all he was
for making an essay, to know if he would be a good mate with his wife;
so for this end, some months aforehand, he did get him a pretty-faced
harlot, whom he made to come every afternoon to his father’s warren,
for ’twas summer-time, where he did frisk and make sport with the
damsel in the freshness of the green trees and a gushing fountain in
such wise that he did perform wonders. Thus encouraged, he feared no
man, but was ready enough to play the like bold part with his wife. But
the worst of it was that when the marriage night was come, and it was
time to go with his wife, lo! he cannot do a thing. Who so astonished
as the poor youth, and who so ready to cry out upon his accursed
recreant weapon, which had so missed fire in the new spot where he now
was. Finally plucking up his courage, he said thus to his wife, “My
pretty one, I cannot tell what this doth mean, for every day I have
done wonders in the warren,” and so recounted over his deeds of prowess
to her. “Let us to sleep now, and my advice is, to-morrow after dinner
I will take you thither, and you shall see very different sport.” This
he did, and his wife found him as good as his word. Hence the saying
current at Court, “Ha, ha! an if I had you in my father’s warren,
you should see what I would do!” We can only suppose that the god of
gardens, Dan Priapus, and the fauns and wanton satyrs which haunt the
woods, do there aid good fellows and favour their deeds of prowess.

Yet are not all essays alike, nor do all end favorably. For in matter
of love, I have both seen and heard tell of not a few good champions
which have failed to remember their lessons and keep their engagements
when they came to the chief task of all. For while some be either
too hot or too cold, in such wise that these humours, of ice or of
fire, do take them of a sudden, others be lost in an ecstasy to find
so sovran a treat within their arms; others again grow over fearful,
others get instantly and totally flaccid and impotent, without the
least knowing the reason why, and yet others find themselves actually
paralysed. In a word there be so many unexpected accidents which may
occur just at the wrong moment, that if I were to tell them all, I
should not have done for ages. I can only refer me to many married
folk and other amateurs of love, who can say an hundred times more
of all this than I. Now such essays be good for the men, but not for
the women. Thus I have heard tell of a mother, a lady of quality, who
holding very dear an only daughter she had, and having promised the
same in marriage to an honourable gentleman, avant que de l’y faire
entrer et craignant qu’elle ne pût souffrir ce premier et dur effort,
à quoi on disait le gentilhomme être très rude et fort proportionné,
elle la fit essayer premièrement par un jeune page qu’elle avait, assez
grandet, une douzaine de fois, disant qu’il n’y avait que la première
ouverture fâcheuse à faire et que, se faisant un peu douce et petite
au commencement, qu’elle endurerait la grande plus aisément; comme il
advint, et qu’il y put avoir de l’apparence. Cet essai est encore bien
plus honnête et moins scandaleux qu’un qui me fut dit une fois, en
Italie, d’un père qui avait marié son fils, qui était encore un jeune
sot, avec une fort belle fille à laquelle, tant fat qu’il était, il
n’avait rien pu faire ni la première ni la seconde nuit de ses noces;
et comme il eut demandé et au fils et à la nore comme ils se trouvaient
en mariage et s’ils avaient triomphé, ils répondirent l’un et l’autre:
“_Niente_.—A quoi a-t-il tenu?” demanda à son fils. Il répondit tout
follement qu’il ne savait comment il fallait faire. Sur quoi il prit
son fils par une main et la nore par une autre et les mena tous deux en
une chambre et leur dit: “Or je vous veux donc montrer comme il faut
faire.” Et fit coucher sa nore sur un bout de lit, et lui fait bien
élargir les jambes, et puis dit à son fils: “Or vois comment je fais,”
et dit à sa nore: “Ne bougez, non importe, il n’y a point de mal.”
Et en mettant son membre bien arboré dedans, dit: “Avise bien comme
je fais et comme je dis, _Dentro fuero, dentro fuero_,” et répliqua
souvent ces deux mots en s’avançant dedans et reculant, non pourtant
tout dehors. Et ainsi, après ces fréquentes agitations et paroles,
_dentro_ et _fuero_, quand ce vint à la consommation, il se mit à dire
brusquement et vite: _Dentro, dentro, dentro, dentro_, jusqu’à ce qu’il
eût fait. Au diable le mot de _fuero_. Et par ainsi, pensant faire du
magister, il fut tout à plat adultère de sa nore, laquelle, ou qu’elle
fit de la niaise ou, pour mieux dire, de la fine, s’en trouva très bien
pour ce coup, voire pour d’autres que lui donna le fils et le père et
tout, possible pour lui mieux apprendre sa leçon, laquelle il ne lui
voulut pas apprendre à demi ni à moitié, mais à perfection. Aussi toute
leçon ne vaut rieu autrement.

I have heard many enterprising and successful Lovelaces declare how
that they have often seen ladies in these faints and swoonings, yet
always readily coming to again afterward. Many women, they said, do cry
out: “Alackaday! I am a-dying!”—but ’tis, I ween, a mighty agreeable
sort of death. Others there be which do turn back their eyes in their
head for excess of pleasure, as if about to expire outright, and let
themselves go absolutely motionless and insensible. Others I have been
told do so stiffen and spasmodically contract their nerves, arteries
and limbs, as that they do bring on cramp; as one lady I have heard
speak of, which was so subject thereto she could never be cured.

Anent these same swoonings, I have heard tell of a fair lady, which
was being embraced by her lover on top of a large chest or coffer.
Very suddenly and unavoidably for herself, she did swoon right off in
such wise that she did let herself slide behind the coffer with legs
projected in the air, and getting so entangled betwixt the coffer and
the tapestry of the wall, that while she was yet struggling to free
herself and her cavalier helping her, there entered some company and
so surprised her in this forked-radish attitude. These had time enough
to see all she had,—which was all very pretty and dainty however,—and
all the poor woman could do was to cover herself up as best she might,
saying so and so had pushed her, as they were playing, behind the
coffer, and declaring how that she would never like the fellow again
for it.

Cette dame courut bien plus grande fortune qu’une que j’ai ouï dire,
laquelle, alors que son ami la tenait embrassée et investie sur le bord
de son lit, quand ce vint sur la douce fin qu’il eut achevé et que par
trop il s’étendait, il avait par cas des escarpins neufs qui avaient
la semelle glissante, et s’appuyant sur des carreaux plombés dont la
chambre était pavée, qui sont fort sujets à faire glisser, il vint à
se couler et glisser si bien sans se pouvoir arrêter que, du pourpoint
qu’il avait, tout recouvert de clinquant, il en écorcha de telle façon
le ventre, la motte le cas et les cuisses de sa maitresse que vous
eussiez dit que les griffes d’un chat y avaient passé; ce qui cuisait
si fort la dame qu’elle en fit un grand cri et ne s’en put garder; mais
le meilleur fut que la dame, parce que c’était en été et faisait grand
chaud, s’était mise en appareil un peu plus lubrique que les autres
fois, car elle n’avait que sa chemise bien blanche et un manteau de
satin blanc dessus, et les caleçons à part e si bien que le gentilhomme.

The lady told the story to one of her female friends, and the gentleman
to one of his comrades. So the thing came to be known, from being again
repeated over to others; for indeed ’twas a right good tale and very
meet to provoke mirth.

And no doubt but the ladies, whenas they be alone, among their most
privy bosom-friends, do repeat merry tales, everywhit as much as we
men-folk do, and tell each other their amorous adventures and all their
most secret tricks and turns, and afterward laugh long and loud over
the same, making fine fun of their gallants, whenever these be guilty
of some silly mistake or commit some ridiculous and foolish action.

Yea! and they do even better than this. For they do filch their lovers
the one from the other, and this sometimes not so much for passion’s
sake, but rather for to draw from them all their secrets, the pretty
games and naughty follies they have practised with them. These they do
then turn to their own advantage, whether still further to stir their
ardour, or by way of revenge, or to get the better one of the other in
their privy debates and wranglings when they be met together.

In the days of this same King Henri III. was made that satire without
words consisting of the book of pictures I have spoke of above, of
sundry ladies in divers postures and connections with their gallants.
’Twas exceeding base and scurrilous,—for the which see the above
passage wherein I have described the same.

Well! enough said on this matter. I could wish from my heart that not
a few evil tongues in this our land of France could be chastened and
refrain them from their scandal-making, and comport them more after
the Spanish fashion. For no man there durst, on peril of his life, to
make so much as the smallest reflection on the honour of ladies of
rank and reputation. Nay! so scrupulously are they respected that on
meeting them in any place whatsoever, an if the faintest cry is raised
of _lugar a las damas_, every man doth lout low and pay them all honour
and reverence. Before them is all insolence straitly forbid on pain of
death.

Whenas the Empress,[82] wife of the Emperor Charles, made his entry
into Toledo, I have heard tell how that the Marquis de Villena, one
of the great Lords of Spain, for having threatened an alguasil, which
had forcibly hindered him from stepping forward, came nigh being sore
punished, because the threat was uttered in presence of the Empress;
whereas, had it been merely in the Emperor’s, no such great ado would
have been made.

The Duc de Feria being in Flanders, and the Queens Eleanor and Marie
taking the air abroad, and their Court ladies following after them,
it fell out that as he was walking beside them, he did come to words
with an other Spanish knight. For this the pair of them came very nigh
to losing their lives,—more for having made such a scandal before the
Queen and Empress than for any other cause.

The same befell Don Carlos d’Avalos at Madrid, as Queen Isabelle of
France was walking through the town; and had he not sped instantly
into a Church which doth there serve as sanctuary for poor unfortunate
folk, he had been straightway put to death. The end was he had to fly
in disguise, and leave Spain altogether; and was kept in banishment all
his life long and confined in the most wretched islet of all Italy,
Lipari to wit.

Court jesters even, which have usually full license of free speech,
an if they do assail the ladies, do get somewhat to remember. It did
so fall out one time to a Fool called Legat, whom I once knew myself.
Queen Elizabeth of France[83*] once in conversation speaking of the
houses at Madrid and Valladolid, how charming and agreeable these were,
did declare she wished with all her heart the two places were so near
she could e’en touch one with one foot and the other with the other,
spreading her legs very wide open as she said the words. The Fool, who
heard the remark, cried, “And I should dearly wish to be in betwixt,
_con un carrajo de borrico, para encarguar y plantar la raya_,”—that
is, “with a fool’s cudgel to mark and fix the boundary withal.” For
this he was soundly whipped in the kitchens. Yet was he well justified
in forming such a wish; for truly was she one of the fairest, most
agreeable and honourable ladies was ever in all Spain, and well
deserving to be desired in this fashion,—only of folk more honourable
than he an hundred thousand times.

I ween these fine slanderers and traducers of ladies would dearly
love to have and enjoy the same privilege and license the vintagers
do possess in the country parts of Naples at vintage time. These be
allowed, so long as the vintage dureth, to shout forth any sort of vile
word and insult and ribaldry to all that pass that way, coming and
going on the roads. Thus will you see them crying and screaming after
all wayfarers and vilifying the same, without sparing any, whether
great, middling or humble folk, of what estate soever they be. Nor
do they spare,—and this is the merry part on’t,—the ladies one whit
neither, high-born dames or Princesses or any. Indeed in my day I did
there hear of not a few fine ladies, and see them too, which would make
a pretext to hie them to the fields on purpose, so as they might pass
along the roads, and so hearken to this pretty talk and hear a thousand
naughty conceits and lusty words. These the peasants would invent and
roll off in plenty, casting up at the great ladies their naughtiness
and the shameful ways they did use toward their husbands and lovers,
going so far as to chide them for their shameful loves and intimacies
with their own coachmen, pages, lackeys and apparitors, which were of
their train. Going yet further, they would ask them right out for the
courtesy of their company, saying they would assault them roundly and
satisfy them better than all the others could. All this they would
let out in words of a fine, natural frankness and bluntness, without
any sort of glossing or disguising. The ladies had their good laugh
and pastime out of the thing, and there an end, making their servants
which were with them answer back in the like strain and give as good as
they got. The vintage once done and over, there is truce of suchlike
language till another year, else would they be brought to book and sore
punished.

I am told the said custom doth still endure, and that many folk in
France would fain have it observed there also at some season of the
year or other, to enjoy in security the pleasure of their evil
speaking, which they do love so well.

Well! to make an end of the subject, ’tis very meet all ladies be
respected of all men, and the secret of their loves and favours duly
kept. This is why Pietro Aretino said, that when lovers were come
to it, the kisses that man and maid did give each other were not
so much for their mutual delight as for to join connection of the
mouths together and so make signal betwixt them that they do keep
hid the secret of their merry doings. Nay, more! that some lustful
and lascivious husbands do in their wantonness show them so free and
extravagant in words, as that not content with committing sundry
naughty profligacies with their wives, they do declare and publish
the same to their boon-companions, and make fine tales out of them.
So much so that I have myself known wives which did conceive a mortal
repugnance to their husbands for this cause and would even very often
refuse them the pleasures they had erst afforded them. They would not
have such scandalous things said of them, albeit ’twas but betwixt
husband and wife.

M. du Bellay, the poet, in his book of Latin epitaphs called _Les
Tombeaux_, which he hath composed, and very fine it is, hath writ one
on a dog, that methinks is well worth quoting here, for ’tis writ much
in our own manner. It runneth thus:

                 Latratu fures excepi, mutus amentes.
                 Sic placui domino, sic placui dominæ.

  (By my barking I did drive away thieves, with a quiet tongue I did
  greet lovers. Thus I did please my master, and thus my mistress.)

Well! if we are so to love animals for discreetness, how much more must
we not value men for holding silence? And if we are to take advice on
this matter of a courtesan which was one of the most celebrated of
former days, and a past mistress in her art, to wit Lamia, here it
is. Asked wherein a woman did find most satisfaction in her lover,
she replied ’twas when he was discreet in talk and secret as to what
he did. Above all else she said she did hate a boaster, one that was
forever boasting of what he did not do, yet failing to accomplish
what he promised,—two faults, each as bad as the other. She was used
to say further: that a woman, albeit ready enough to be indiscreet,
would never willingly be called harlot, nor published abroad for such.
Moreover she said how that she did never make merry at a man’s expense,
nor any man at hers, nor did any ever miscall her. A fair dame of this
sort, so experienced in love’s mysteries, may well give lessons to
other women.

Well, well! enough said on these points. Another man, more eloquent
than I, might have embellished and ennobled the subject better far. To
such I do pass on hereby mine arms and pen.




       [Illustration: Decorative scrollwork above chapter start]




                        SEVENTH DISCOURSE[84*]

          Concerning married women, widows and maids,—to wit,
         which of these same be better than the other to love.


                             INTRODUCTION

One day when I was at the Court of Spain at Madrid, and conversing
with a very honourable lady, as is the way at Kings’ Courts, she
did chance to ask me this question following: _Qual era mayor fuego
d’amor, el de la biuda, el de la casada, o de la hija moça_,—“which of
the three had the greater heat of love, widow, wife or maid?” After
myself had told her mine opinion, she did in turn give me hers in some
such terms as these: _Lo que me parece d’ esta cosa es que, aunque
las moças con el hervor de la sangre, se disponen á querer mucho, no
deve ser tanto como lo que quieren las casadas y biudas, con la gran
experiencia del negocio. Esta razon debe ser natural, como lo seria la
del que, por haver nacido ciego de la perfeccion de la luz, no puede
cobdiciar de ella con tanto deseo como el que vio, y fue privado de la
vista._—“What I think on the matter is this: that albeit maids, with
all that heat of blood that is theirs, be right well disposed to love,
yet do they not love so well as wives and widows. This is because of
the great experience of the business the latter have, and the obvious
fact that supposing a man born blind, and from birth robbed of all
power of vision, he can never desire the gift so strongly as he that
hath sweetly enjoyed the same a while and then been deprived thereof.”
To which she did presently add this further remark: _Con menos pena
se abstiene d’ una cosa la persona que nunca supo, que aquella que
vive enamorada del gusto pasado_—“How that one could with a lesser ado
refrain from a thing one had never tried, than from one already known
and loved.” Such were the reasons this lady did adduce on this moot
point.

Again the respected and learned Boccaccio, among the questions
discussed in his _Filicopo_,[85*] doth in the ninth treat of this same
problem: Which of these three, wife, widow or maid, a man should rather
fall in love with, in order the more happily to carry his desire into
effect? The author doth answer by the mouth of the Queen he doth there
introduce speaking, that although ’tis of course very ill done and
against God and one’s own conscience to covet a married woman, which
is in no sense another’s, but subject to her husband, it is natheless
far easier to come to the point with her than ever with maid or widow,
albeit such love is dangerous,—seeing the more a man doth blow the
fire, the more he rouseth it, whereas otherwise it dieth down. Indeed
all things do wane in the using, except only wantonness, which doth
rather wax. But the widow, which hath been long without such exercise,
doth scarce feel it at all, and doth take no more account of love than
if she had never been married, and is more heated by memory of the past
than by present concupiscence. Also the maid, which hath no knowledge
nor experience of what it is, save by imagination, hath but a lukewarm
longing therefor. On the other hand the married woman, heated more
than the others, doth oft desire to come to the point and enjoy this
pleasure, in spite of its sometimes bringing on her her husband’s sore
displeasure manifested in words and eke blows. For all this, fain to
be revenged on him (for naught is so vengeful as a woman), as well as
for sake of the thing itself, doth the wife make him cuckold right out,
and enjoy the desire of her heart. Beside, folk do soon weary of eating
ever of the same meat, and for this cause even great Lords and Ladies
do often leave good and delicate viands for to take others instead.
Moreover, with girls, ’tis a matter of overmuch pains and consumption
of time to tame them and bring them round to the will of men; nay! an
if they _do_ love, they know not that they do. But with widows, the old
fire doth readily recover its vigour, very soon making them desire once
more what by reason of long discontinuance they had forgot the savour
of. Thus they be not slow to come back again to the old delights, only
regretting the time wasted and the weary nights of widowhood passed all
alone and uncomforted in their cold beds.

In answer to these arguments of the Queen, a certain gentleman named
Faramond doth make reply. Leaving married women aside altogether, as
being so easy to get the better of without a man’s using any great
reasoning to persuade them to it, he doth consider the case of maids
and widows, maintaining the maid to be more steadfast in love than the
widow. For the widow, who hath experienced in the past the secrets
of passion, doth never love steadfastly, but always doubtfully and
tentatively, quickly changing and desiring now one, now another
gallant, never knowing to which she should give herself for her
greater advantage and honour! Nay! sometimes so vacillating is she in
her long deliberations she doth choose never an one at all, and her
amorous passion can find no steadfast hold whatever. Quite opposite is
the maid, he saith, and all such doubts and hesitations be foreign to
her. Her one desire is to have a lover true, and after once choosing
him well, to give all her soul to him and please him in all things,
deeming it the best honour she can do him to be true and steadfast in
her love. So being only too ardent for the things which have never yet
been seen, heard or proven of her, she doth long far more than other
women which have had experience of life, to see, hear and prove all
such matters. Thus the keen desire she hath to see new things doth
strongly dominate her heart; she doth make enquiries of them that
know,—which doth increase her flame yet more. Accordingly she is very
eager to be joined with him she hath made Lord of her affections,
whereas this same ardour is not in the widow, seeing she hath passed
that way already.

Well at the last the Queen in Boccaccio, taking up the word again and
wishing to give a final answer to the question, doth thus conclude:
That the widow is more painstaking of the pleasure of love an hundred
fold than the virgin, seeing the latter is all for dearly guarding her
precious virginity and maidenhead. Further, virgins be naturally timid,
and above all in this matter, awkward and inept to find the sweet
artifices and pretty complaisances required under divers circumstances
in such encounters. But this is not so with the widow, who is already
well practised, bold and ready in this art, having long ago bestowed
and given away what the virgin doth make so much ado about giving. For
this cause she hath no fear of her person being looked at, or her
virtue impugned by the discovery of any mark of lapse from honour; and
in all respects she doth better know the secret ways for to arrive at
her end. Beside all this, the maid doth dread this first assault of her
virginity, which in many women is sometimes rather grievous and painful
than soft and pleasant, whereas widows have no such fear, but do submit
themselves very sweetly and gently, even when the assailant be of the
roughest. Now this particular pleasure is quite different from many
others, for with them a man is oft satisfied with the first experience
and goeth lightly to others, whereas in this the longing to return once
more to the same doth ever wax more and more. Accordingly the widow,
which doth give least, but giveth it often, is an hundred times more
liberal than the maid, when this last doth at length consent to abandon
her most precious possession, to the which she doth direct a thousand
thoughts and regrets. Wherefore, the Queen doth conclude, ’tis much
better for a man to address himself to a widow than to a maid, as being
far easier to gain over and corrupt.




       [Illustration: Decorative scrollwork above chapter start]




                               ARTICLE I

                     OF THE LOVE OF MARRIED WOMEN


Now to take and further consider these arguments of Boccaccio, and
expand them somewhat, and discuss the same, according to the words I
have heard spoke of many honourable gentlefolk, both men and women,
on these matters,—as the result of ample knowledge and experience, I
declare there can be no doubt that any man wishing quickly to have
fruition of love, must address him to married ladies, an if he would
avoid great trouble and much consumption of time; for, as Boccaccio
saith, the more a fire is stirred, the more ardent doth it grow. And
’tis the married woman which doth grow so hot with her husband, that an
if he be lacking in the wherewithal to extinguish the fire he doth give
his wife, she must needs borrow of another man, or burn up alive. I
did once know myself a lady of good birth, of a great and high family,
which did one day tell her lover, and he did repeat the tale to me,
how that of her natural disposition she was in no wise keen for this
pleasure so much as folk would think (and God wot this is keen enough),
and was ready and willing many a time to go without, were it not that
her husband stirring her up, while yet he was not strong or capable
enough to properly assuage her heat, he did make her so fierce and hot
she was bound to resort for succour in this pass to her lover. Nay!
very often not getting satisfaction enough of him even, she would
withdraw her alone, to her closet or her bed, and there in secrecy
would cure her passion as best she might. Why! she declared, had it
not been for very shame, she would have given herself to the first she
met in a ballroom, in any alcove, or on the very steps, so tormented
was she with this terrible feeling. Herein was she for all the world
like the mares on the borders of Andalusia, which getting so hot and
not finding their stallions there to leap them and so unable to have
satisfaction, do set their natural opening against the wind blowing
in these plains, which doth so enter in and assuageth their heat and
getteth them with foal. Hence spring those steeds of such fleetness we
see from those regions, as though keeping some of the fleetness and
natural swiftness of the wind their sire. I ween there be husbands
enough would be right glad if their wives could find such a wind as
this, to refresh them and assuage their heat, without their having to
resort to their lovers and give their poor mates most unbecoming horns
for their heads.

Truly a strange idiosyncrasy in a woman, the one I have just
adduced,—not to burn, but when stirred of another. Yet need we be in
no way astonished thereat, for as said a Spanish lady: _Que quanto
mas me quiero sacar de la braza, tanto mas mi marido me abraza en el
brazero_,—“The more I am for avoiding the embers, the more my husband
doth burn me in my brazier.” And truly women may well be kindled that
way, seeing how by mere words, by touching and embracing alone, even
by alluring looks, they do readily allow themselves to be drawn to it,
when they find opportunity, without a thought of the consideration they
owe their husbands.

For, to tell the real truth, what doth most hinder every woman, wife
or maid, from taking of this pleasure again and again is the dread
they feel of having their belly swell, without eating beans,—an event
married ladies do not fear a whit. For an if they do so swell, why!
’tis the poor husband that hath done it all, and getteth all the
credit. And as for the laws of honour which do forbid them so to
do, why! Boccaccio doth plainly say the most part of women do laugh
at these, alleging for reason and justification: that Nature’s laws
come first, which doth never aught in vain, and hath given them such
excellent members to be used and set to work, and not to be left idle
and unemployed. Nature neither forbiddeth the proper exercise of these
nor imposeth disuse on these parts more than on any other; else would
the spiders be building their webs there, as I have said in another
place, unless they do find brushes meet to sweep them away withal.
Beside, from keeping themselves unexercised do very oft spring sore
complaints and even dangers to life,—and above all a choking of the
womb, whereof so many women die as ’tis pitiful to see, and these
right fair and honourable dames. All this for sake of this plaguey
continence, whereof the best remedy, say the doctors, is just carnal
connection, and especially with very vigorous and well provided
husbands. They say further, at any rate some of our fair ones do, that
this law of honour is only for them that love not and have got them
no true and honourable lovers, in whom no doubt ’tis unbecoming and
blameworthy to go sacrifice to the chastity of their body, as if they
were no better than courtesans. But such as truly love, and have gotten
them lovers well chosen and good, this law of honour doth in no wise
forbid them to help these to assuage the fires that burn them, and
give them wherewithal to extinguish the same. This is verily and indeed
for women to give life to the suppliant asking it, showing themselves
gentle-hearted benefactresses, not savage and cruel tyrants.

This is what Renaldo said, whom I have spoke of in a former discourse,
when telling of the poor afflicted Ginevra. As to this, I did once
know a very honourable lady and a great one, whom her lover did one
day find in her closet, translating that famous stanza of the said
Renaldo beginning, _Una donna deve dunque morire_,—“A lady fair was
like to die,” into French verse, as fair and fairly wrought, as ever I
have seen,—for I did see the lines after. On his asking her what she
had writ there, she replied: “See, a translation I have just made,
which is at once mine own judgment by me delivered, and a sentence
pronounced in your favour for to content you in that you desire,—and
only the execution doth now remain;” and this last, the reading done,
was promptly carried out. A better sentence i’faith than was ever given
in the Bailey Court of the Paris Parliament![86] For of all the fine
words and excellent arguments wherewith Ariosto hath adorned Renaldo’s
speech, I do assure you the lady forgat never an one to translate and
reproduce them all well and thoroughly, so as the translation was as
meet as ever the original to stir the heart. Thus did she let her lover
plainly understand she was ready enough to save his life, and not
inexorable to his supplication, while he was no less apt to seize his
opportunity.

Why then shall a lady, when that Nature hath made her good and full
of pity, not use freely the gifts given her, without ingratitude to
the giver, and without resistance and contradiction to her laws? This
was the view of a fair lady I have heard speak of, which watching her
husband one day walking up and down in a great hall, cannot refrain her
from turning to her lover and saying, “Just look at our good man pacing
there; has not he the true build of a cuckold? Surely I should have
gone sore against dame Nature, seeing she had created him and destined
him for this, an if I had contradicted her intent and given her the
lie!”

I have heard speak of another lady, which did thus complain of her
husband, which did treat her ill and was ever jealously spying on her,
suspecting she was making him a set of horns: “Nay! he is too good,”
she would cry to her lover; “he thinks his fire is a match for mine.
Why! I do put his out in a turn of the hand, with four or five drops of
water. But for mine, which hath a very different depth of furnace, I do
need a flood. For we women be of our nature like dropsical folk or a
sandy ditch, which the more water they swallow, the more they want.”

Another said yet better, how that a woman was like chickens, which do
get the pip and die thereof, if they be stinted of water and have not
enough to drink. A woman is the same, which doth breed the pip and
oft die thereof, if they are not frequently given to drink; only ’tis
something else than spring water it must have. Another fair lady was
used to say she was like a good garden, which not content with the rain
of heaven only, doth ask water of the gardener as well, to be made more
fruitful thereby. Another would say she would fain resemble those good
economists and excellent managers which do never give out all their
property to be guided and a profit earned to one agent alone, but do
divide it among several hands. One alone could not properly suffice to
get good value. After a similar fashion was she for managing herself,
to make the best thereof and for herself to reap the highest enjoyment.

I have heard of yet another lady which had a most ill-favoured lover,
and a very handsome husband and of a good grace, the lady herself
being likewise very well-looking. One of her chiefest lady friends
and gossips remonstrating with her and asking why she did not choose
a handsomer lover, “Know you not,” she said, “that to cultivate well
a piece of land more than one labourer is wanted, and as a rule the
best-looking and most dainty be not the most meet workers, but the most
rustical and hardy?” Another lady I knew, which had a very ill-favoured
husband and of a very evil grace, did choose a lover as foul as he; and
when one of her friends did ask her the reason why, “’Tis the better,”
quoth she, “to accustom me to mine husband’s ugliness.”

Yet another lady, discoursing one day of love, as well her own as that
of other fair ladies her companions, said: “An if women were alway
chaste, why! they would never know but one side of life,”—herein basing
on the doctrine of the Emperor Heliogabalus, who was used to declare,
“that one half of a man’s life should be employed in virtues, and the
other half in vices; else being always in one condition, either wholly
good or wholly bad, one could never judge of the opposite side at all,
which yet doth oft serve the better to attemper the first.” I have
known great personages to approve this maxim, and especially where
women were concerned. Again the wife of the Emperor Sigismund, who
was called Barba,[87*] was used to say that to be forever in one and
the same condition of chastity was a fool woman’s part, and did much
reprove her ladies, wives or maids, which did persist in this foolish
opinion, and most surely for her own part did very thoroughly repudiate
the same. For indeed all her pleasure lay but in feasts, dances, balls
and love-makings, and much mockery was for any which did not the like,
or which did fast to mortify the flesh, and were for following a quiet
life. I leave you to imagine if it went not well at the Court of this
Emperor and Empress,—I mean for all such, men and women, as take joy in
love’s pleasures.

I have heard speak of a very honourable lady and of good repute, which
did fairly fall ill of the love which she bare her lover, yet did never
consent to risk the matter, because of this same high law of honour so
much insisted on and preached up of husbands. But seeing how day by day
she was more and more consumed away and burned up, in such wise that
in a twinkling she did behold herself wax dry, lean, and languishing,
and from being aforetime fresh, plump and in good case, now all changed
and altered, as her mirror informed her, she did at length cry: “Nay!
how shall it be said of me that in the flower of mine age, and at
the prompting of a mere frivolous point of honour and silly scruple
making me overmuch keep in my natural fire, I did thus come to dry up
and waste away, and grow old and ugly before my time, and lose all
the bloom of my beauty, which did erst make me valued and preferred
and loved. Instead of a fair lady of good flesh and bone I am become
a skeleton, a very anatomy, enough to make folk banish me and jeer at
me in any good company, a laughing-stock to all and sundry. No! I will
save me from such a fate; I will use the remedies I have in my power.”
And herewith, what she said, she did, and contenting her own and her
love’s desires, she soon gat back her flesh again and grew as fair as
before,—without her husband’s ever suspecting the remedy she had used,
but attributing the cure to the doctors, whom he did greatly honour and
warmly thank for having so restored his wife to health for his better
profit and enjoyment.

I have heard speak of another great lady, one of a merry humour and a
pretty wit, to whom, being sick, her physician did one day declare how
that she would never be well, unless she changed her habits. Hereupon
she answered straight, “Well then! let us do it.” So the physician and
she did take one with the other joy of heart and body. One day she said
to him, “People all declare you do it for me; but there, ’tis all one,
as I am so much better. And all ever I can, I will go on doing it,—as
mine health doth depend on it.”

These two dames last spoke of were quite unlike that honourable lady
of Pampeluna in Spain, whom I have already mentioned in a previous
passage, and who is described in the _Cent Nouvelles_ of the Queen of
Navarre. This lady, being madly in love with M. d’Avannes, did think
it better to hide her flame, and keep hid in her bosom the passion
that was consuming her, and die thereof, than lose her honour. But by
what I have heard sundry honourable lords and ladies say in discussing
the matter, she was a fool for her pains, and little regardful of her
soul’s salvation, seeing she did bring about her own death, it being in
her power to avoid this extremity, and all for a trifle. For in very
fact, as an old French proverb doth put it, “_D’une herbe de pré tondue
et d’un c... f..., le dommage est bientôt rendu._” And what is it,
when all is done? The business, once done, is like any other; what sign
is there of it to men’s eyes? Doth the lady walk any the less upright?
doth the world know aught? I mean of course when ’tis done in secret,
with closed doors, and no man by to see. I would much like to know
this, if many of the great ladies of mine own acquaintance, for ’tis
with such love doth most take up abode (as this same lady of Pampeluna
saith, ’tis at high portals that high winds do beat), if these do
therefore cease to walk abroad with proudly lifted head, whether at
this Court of France or elsewhere, and show them as unabashed as
ever a Bradamant or Marfisa of them all. And pray, who would be so
presumptuous as to ask them if they condescend to it? Even their
husband (I tell you), the most of them at any rate, would never dare to
charge them with it, so well do they understand the art of concealment
and the keeping of a confident show and carriage. But an if these same
husbands, any of them, do think to speak thereof and threaten them,
or punish them with harsh words or deeds, why! they be undone; for
then, even though before they had planned no ill against them, yet do
they straightway plot revenge and give them back as good as they have
gotten. For is there not an old proverb which saith, “When and so soon
as a husband doth beat his wife, her body doth laugh for joy”? That is
to say, it doth presently look for good times, knowing the natural bent
of its mistress, who unable to avenge her wrongs by other weapons, will
turn it to account as second and best ally, to pay her husband back
with her lover’s help, no matter what watch and ward the poor man keep
over her.

For verily, to attain their end, the most sovran means they have is
to make their complaints to one another, or to their women and maids
of the chamber, and so win these over to get them new lovers, if they
have none, or an if they have, to convey these privily to places of
assignation; and ’tis they which do mount guard that neither husband
nor any other surprise them at it. Thus then do these ladies gain over
their maids and women, bribing them with presents and good promises.
In certain cases beside they do make agreement and composition with
these, on the terms that of all the lover may give their lady mistress,
the servant shall have the half or at least the third part thereof.
But the worst is, very often the mistresses do deceive their servants,
taking the whole for themselves, making excuse that their lover hath
given them no more than so small a share as that they have not enough
to spare aught for others. Thus do they hoax these poor wenches and
serving maids, albeit they stand sentinel and keep good watch. This is
a sore injustice; and I ween, were the case to be tried with proper
arguments pleaded on this side and that, ’twould afford occasion for
much merriment and shrewd debate. For ’tis verily theft, no less,
so to filch their benefices and emoluments duly agreed upon. Other
ladies there be however who do keep faithfully their promise and
compact, and hold back naught, for to be the better served and loyally
helped, herein copying those honest shop-keepers, who do render a just
proportion of the gain and profit of the talent their master or partner
hath entrusted them withal. And truly such dames do deserve to be right
well served, seeing they be duly grateful for the trouble, and good
watch and ward of their inferiors. And these last do run many risks
and perils,—as one I wot of, who keeping guard one day, the while her
mistress was with her lover and having merry times, both the twain
being right well occupied, was caught by the husband’s house-steward.
The man did chide her bitterly for what she was at, saying ’twere more
becoming for her had she been with her mistress than to be playing
procuress like this and standing sentinel outside her door. ’Twas a
foul trick she was playing her mistress’ husband, and he would go warn
him. However the lady did win him over by means of another of her
maids, of whom he was enamoured and who did promise him some favour at
her mistress’ prayers; beside, she did make him a present, and he was
at last appeased. Natheless she did never like him afterward, and kept
a shrewd eye on his doings; finally spying an opportunity and taking it
on the hop, she did get him dismissed by her husband.

I wot of a fair and honourable lady,[88*] which did take a serving
maid of hers into great intimacy and high favour and friendship,
even allowing her much intimacy, having trained her well for such
intercourse. So free was she with her mistress that sometimes when she
did see this lady’s husband longtime absent from his house, engaged
either at Court or on some journey, oft would she gaze at her mistress
as she was dressing her, (and she was one of the most beautiful and
lovable women of her day), and presently remark: “Ah, me! is he not
ill-starred, Madam, that husband of yours, to possess so fair a wife,
and yet have to leave her thus all alone so long without ever setting
eyes on her? Doth he not deserve you should cuckold him outright? You
really ought; and if I were as handsome as you, I should do as much to
mine husband, if he tarried so much away.” I leave you to judge if
the lady and mistress of this serving maid did find this a tasty nut
to crack, especially finding as she did shoes all ready to her feet,
whereof she did after make good use, freely employing so handy an
instrument.

Again, there be ladies which do make use of their serving maids to
help them hide their amours and prevent their husbands observing aught
amiss, and do give them charge of their lovers, to keep and hold them
as their own suitors, under this pretext to be able at any time to
say, if the husbands do find them in their wives’ chambers, that they
be there as paying court to such or such an one of their maids. So
under this cloak hath the lady a most excellent means of playing her
game, and the husband know naught at all about it. I knew a very great
Prince indeed which did set him to pay court to a lady of the wardrobe
to a great Princess, solely to find out the secret intrigues of her
mistress, and so the better gain success in that quarter.

I have seen plenty of these tricks played in my lifetime, though not
altogether in the fashion followed by a certain honourable lady of
the world I once knew, which was so fortunate as to be loved of three
brave and gallant gentlemen, one after the other. These on quitting
her, did presently after love and serve a very great lady, whereon
she did very pleasantly and good-humouredly deliver herself to this
effect. ’Twas she, she said, who had so trained and fashioned them by
her excellent lessons, as that coming now into the service of the said
great Princess, they were exceeding well formed and educated. To rise
so high, she declared, ’twas very needful first to serve smaller folk,
in order not to fail with greater; for to arrive at any supreme degree
of skill, a man must needs mount first by small and low degrees, as is
seen in all arts and sciences.

This did her great honour. Yet more deserving still was another I have
heard tell of, which was in the train of a great lady. This lady was
married, and being surprised by her husband in her chamber receiving
a little paper note or _billet doux_ from her lover, was right well
succoured by her subordinate. For this last, cleverly intercepting the
note, did swallow down the same at one gulp without making any bones
about it and without the husband perceiving aught, who would have
treated his wife very ill indeed, if he had once seen the inside. This
was a very noble piece of service, and one the great lady was always
grateful for.

On the other hand I wot well of ladies which have found them in evil
case for having overmuch trusted their serving maids, and others again
for not having trusted them at all. I have heard speak of a fair and
honourable lady, who had taken and chose out a gentleman, one of the
bravest, most valiant and well accomplished of all France, to give the
same pleasure and delight of herself. She would never trust any one
of her women, and assignation being given in a friend’s house, it was
concerted and arranged there should be but one bed in the chamber, her
women all sleeping in the antechamber. As settled, so done. And as
there was a cat’s-hole in the door, which they had not remembered or
provided for till the moment, they bethought them to stop this with
a thin board, to the end that if any pushed it down, it would make a
rattle, which they would hear and could take measures accordingly.
One of her women, suspecting a snake in the grass, and angry and hurt
because her mistress had not confided in her, whom she had ever made
her chiefest confidante, and had given many proofs thereof, doth now
make up her mind, so soon as her mistress was to bed, to keep a look
out and listen at the door. She could hear quite well a low murmuring,
yet was sure ’twas not the reading aloud her mistress had for some days
indulged in in bed, with a candle, the better to dissemble what she was
going to do. Just as she was on the tip-toe of curiosity, to know more,
an excellent occasion did present itself most opportunely. For a kitten
happening to come into the room, she and her companions take the animal
and push it through the cat’s-hole into her mistress’ chamber, not of
course without knocking down the board that kept it closed and making
a clatter. At this the pair of lovers, sore startled, did suddenly sit
up in bed, and saw by the light of their candle ’twas only a cat that
had come in and knocked down the board. Wherefore without troubling
more about it, they laid them down again, seeing ’twas now late and
everybody presumably asleep, but never shut to again the cat’s-hole,
leaving the same open for the cat to go out again by, as they did not
care to have it shut up in their room all night long. Seizing so good
an opportunity, the said waiting maid and her companions had a fine
chance to see enough and to spare of their mistress’ doings. These they
did after reveal to the husband, whence came death for the lover, and
shame and disgrace for the lady.

This is what doth come of despite and want of confidence shown
folk, which be often just as productive of ill consequences as
over-confidence. I have heard of a very great nobleman which was moved
one time to take all his wife’s waiting-maids (and she was a well-born
and very fair lady), and have them tortured to make them confess all
their misdeeds and the services they had rendered her in her amours.
However his first intent was carried no further, to avoid too horrible
a scandal. The first suggestion came from a lady whose name I will not
give, who had a grudge against the said great lady. For the which God
did punish her later.




       [Illustration: Decorative scrollwork above chapter start]




                              ARTICLE II

                         OF THE LOVE OF MAIDS


                                  1.

So now, following the order of Boccaccio, our guide in this discourse,
I come next to maids. These, it must certainly be allowed, be of their
nature exceeding timid at first beginning, and dare in no wise yield
up what they hold so dear, spite of the constant persuasion and advice
their fathers, mothers, kinsfolk and mistresses do give them, along
with most moving threats. So it is that, though they should have all
the good will thereto in the world, yet they do deny themselves all
ever they can; beside they have ever before their eyes the terror lest
their bodies do play them false and betray them, else would they try
many a tasty morsel. Yet all have not this scrupulousness; for shutting
their eyes to all reflection, some do rush boldly into it,—not indeed
with head down, but rather thrown well back. Herein do they make a sore
mistake, seeing how terrible is the scandal of a maid deflowered, and
of a thousandfold more import than for married woman or widow. For a
maid, this treasure of hers once lost, is made the object of endless
scandal and abuse, is pointed at by all men, and doth lose many a good
opportunity of marriage. For all this, I have known not a few cases
where some rough fellow or other hath been found, either willingly, or
of sudden caprice, knowingly or unwittingly, on compulsion, to go throw
himself into the breach, and marry them, as I have described elsewhere,
all tarnished as they were, but right glad to get them churched after
all.

Many such of either sex have I known in my day, and in especial one
maid which did most shamefully let herself be got with child by a great
Prince,[89*] and that without an attempt at hiding or dissembling her
condition. On being discovered, all she said was this: “What was I
to do? ’tis not my frailty you must blame, nor my lustfulness, but
only my over heedlessness and lack of foresight. For an if I had been
as clever and knowing as the most part of my companions, which have
done just as ill as I, or even worse, but have had wit enough to cure
their pregnancy or conceal their lying-in, I should not now be in this
strait, nor had any known a word about it.” Her companions did for this
word wish her mighty ill; and she was accordingly expelled the band
by her mistress, albeit ’twas reported this same mistress had ordered
her to yield to the wishes of the Prince, wishing to get an hold over
him and win him to herself. For all this, however, the girl failed not
some while after to make a good match and contract a rich marriage, and
presently give birth to a noble offspring. Thus we see, an if the poor
child had been as wily as her comrades and other girls, this luck had
never been hers. And truly in my day I have seen mere girls as clever
and expert in these matters as ever the oldest married woman, nay!
going so far as to be most effective and experienced procuresses, and
not content with their own satisfaction only, to be after contriving
the same delights for others to boot.

’Twas a lady in waiting at the French Court which did invent and have
performed that fine Comedy entitled the _Paradis d’Amour_ (Paradise of
Love) in the Salle de Bourbon with closed doors, at which performance
were none but actors and actresses present, forming players and
audience both together. Such as do know the story will know what I
mean. The play had six characters, three male and three female. Of
these one was a Prince, who had his fair one, a great lady, though
not too great neither, yet did he love her dearly; the second was a
Lord, who did intrigue with the great Lady, a lady very liberal of her
favours; the third was a simple gentleman, who did carry on with the
maid, whom he did marry later. For the gallant authoress was fain to
see her own character represented on the stage no less than the rest!
Indeed ’tis ever so with the author of a Comedy; he doth put himself
in the play, or else in the prologue. And so did this one, and on my
faith, girl as she was, did play the part as well as the married women,
if not better. The fact is she had seen more of the world than just her
own country, and as the Spaniards say _rafinada en Secobia_,—had had
a Segovia polish or fining. This is a proverb in Spain, Segovia being
where the best cloths are fined.

I have heard tales told of many maids, who while serving their lady
mistresses as _Dariolettes_, or confidantes, have been fain to taste
and try the same dainties. Such ladies moreover be often slaves in
their own women’s hands, from dread of their discovering them and
publishing abroad their amours, as I have noted above. ’Twas a lady in
waiting who did one day tell me her opinion,—that ’twas a mighty piece
of folly for maids to sacrifice their honour to their passions, and
while some silly creatures were restrained therefrom by their scruples,
for herself she would not deign to do it, the whole thing ending in
mere shame and disgrace. On the other hand the trick of keeping one’s
affair privy and secret made all right, and girls were mere fools and
unfit for this wicked world which cannot help themselves and manage the
thing quietly.

A Spanish lady, thinking her daughter was afraid of the violence of
the first wedding night, went to her and began to encourage her and
persuade her ’twas naught at all and she would feel no pain, adding
that herself would be right glad to be in her place the better to show
her how to bear it. To this the girl replied, _Bezo las manos, señora
madre, de tal merced, que bien la tomaré yo por mi_,—“Much thanks,
my lady mother, for your kind offer, but I will manage very well by
myself.”

I have heard a merry tale of a girl of very high birth, who had
contrived to afford herself much pleasure in her life so far, and whom
her family now spake of marrying in Spain. One of her most special and
privy friends said one day to her, by way of jest, how surprised he was
to find that she, which had so dearly loved the _rising_ quarter, was
now about to travel toward the setting or western, because Spain lies
to the westward. To this the lady made answer, “Truly, I have heard
mariners say, men that have travelled far, how that the navigation of
the rising quarter is right pleasant and agreeable; and indeed myself
have steered many a time thither by the compass I do alway carry on
me. So I will take advantage of this same instrument, when I am
in the land of the setting sun, yet to hie away me straight to the
rising.” Judicious commentators will find it easy enough to interpret
the allegory and make a shrewd guess at what I point to. I leave you
to judge by these words whether the damsel had invariably limited her
reading to the “hours” of Our Lady, and none other.

Another damsel I have heard of, and could give her name, who hearing
of the wonders of the city of Venice, its singular beauties and
the liberties there enjoyed of all, and especially of harlots and
courtesans, did exclaim to one of her bosom friends, “I would to God
we had despatched thither all our wealth by letter of credit, and were
there arrived ourselves for to lead the gay and happy existence of
its courtesans, a life none other can come near, even though we were
Empresses of all the whole world!” Truly a good wish and an excellent!
And in very deed I opine they that be fain of such a life could hardly
dwell in a better spot.

No less do I admire another wish, expressed by a lady of former days.
She was questioning a poor slave escaped from the Turks as to the
tortures and sufferings these did inflict on him and other unhappy
Christian captives, who did tell her enough and to spare of cruelties
so inflicted of every sort and kind. Presently she did ask him what
they did to women. “Alas and alas! Madam,” said he, “they do it to
them, and go on doing it, till they die.”—“Well! I would to God,” she
cried, “I might die so, a martyr to the faith.”

Three great Ladies, of whom one was a maid, being together one day, as
I am told, did begin telling their wishes. One said, “I would fain have
an apple-tree that should bear every year as many golden apples as
it doth common fruit.” The second, “I would have a meadow that should
yield me jewels and precious stones as many as it doth flowers.” The
third, which was a maid, “And I would choose a dovecote, whereof the
openings should be worth as much to me as such and such a lady’s coop,
such and such a great King’s favourite, whose name I will not speak;
only I should like mine to be visited of more pigeons than is hers.”

These dames were of a different complexion from a certain Spanish lady,
whose life is writ in the History of Spain, and who, one day when
Alfonzo the Great, King of Aragon, made a state entry into Saragossa,
threw herself on her knees before his Majesty to ask justice of him.
The King signifying his willingness to hear her, she did ask to speak
to him in private, and he did grant her this favour. Hereupon she laid
a complaint against her husband, for that he would lie with her two and
thirty times a month, by day no less than a-nights, in such wise that
he gave her never a minute of rest or respite. So the King did send for
the husband and learned of him ’twas true, the man deeming he could not
be in the wrong seeing it was his own wife; then the King’s council
being summoned to deliberate on the matter, his Majesty did issue
decree and ordered that he should touch her but six times,—not without
expressing his much marvel at the exceeding heat and puissance of the
fellow, and the extraordinary coldness and continence of the wife, so
opposite to the natural bent of other women (so saith the story), which
be ever ready to clasp hands and beseech their husbands or other men to
give them enough of it, and do make sore complaint an if these do give
to others what is their share by rights.

Very different from this last was another lady, a young girl of a good
house, who the day after her wedding, recounting over to her companions
her adventures in the night just done, “What!” cried she, “and is that
all? For all I had heard some of you say, and other women, and men
to boot, which do boast them so bold and gallant, and promise such
mountains of wondrous deeds, why! o’ my faith, friends and comrades
mine, the man (meaning her husband), that made himself out so hot a
lover and valiant a wight, and so fine a runner at the ring, did run
but four all counted,—as it were the regular three for the ring and
one for the ladies.” We can but suppose, as she made such complaint of
scanty measure, she would fain have had a round dozen to her share; but
everyone is not like the Spanish gentleman of our last story.

This is how they do make mock of their husbands. So one, who when
just wed on her first marriage night, did play the prude and was for
obstinately resisting her husband. But he did bethink him to declare
that, and if he had to take his big dagger, ’twould be another game
altogether, and she would have something to cry out for; whereat the
child, fearing the big weapon he did threaten her withal, did yield her
instantly to his wishes. But next time, she was no longer afeared, and
not content with the little one, did ask at first go off for the big
one he had threatened her with the night before. To which the husband
replied he had never a big one, and had said so but in jest; so she
must e’en be satisfied with what little provision he had about him.
Then she cried, “Nay! ’tis very ill done, so to make mock of poor,
simple maids!” I wot not whether we should call this damsel simple and
ignorant, and not rather knowing and artful, as having tried the thing
before. I do refer the question to the learned for decision.

Bien plus estait simple une autre fille, laquelle s’estant plaincte à
la justice que un gallant l’ayant prise par force, et lui enquis sur
ce fait, il respondit: “Messieurs, je m’en rapporte à elle s’il est
orai, et si elle i’a pris mon cas et l’a mis de sa main propre dans lie
sien.—Ha! Messieurs, (dit la fille) il est bien orai cela, mais qu’il
ne l’enst fait? Car, amprés qu’il m’ent couchée et trousée, il me mit
sou cas roide et poinctu comme un baston contre la ventre, et m’en
domisit de si grands coups que j’ens peur qu’il me le percast et m’y
fist im trou. Dame! je lui pris ahers et le mis dans le tron qui estoit
tout fait.” Si cette fille estoit simplette, on le contrefaisoit, j
m’en rapporte.[90*]

I will now tell a couple of stories of two married women, of as
great a simplicity as the last,—or, if you prefer it so, of as great
artfulness. The first was a very great lady of mine acquaintance, a
very fine woman and much sought after for this reason. One day a very
great Prince did make offers to her, pressing her right eagerly and
promising her very fine and most advantageous conditions, rank and
riches without end for herself and her husband, so much so that she did
hearken at first and give a willing ear to such seductive temptations.
However she would not right off consent, but in her simplicity as a new
made wife, knowing naught of the wicked world, she did come and reveal
the whole matter to her husband, asking his advice whether she should
do it or no. The husband firing up instantly, cried, “Never, never,
by God! little wife; what are you talking about, what would you be at?
’Tis a foul deed, an irreparable stain on both of us!”—“But, Sir,”
returned the lady, “we shall both be such grand folk, no one will have
a word to say against us.” In a word the husband did refuse absolutely;
but the lady, beginning presently to pluck up a spirit and understand
the world, was loath to lose the chance, and did take her fling with
the said Prince and others beside, quite forgetting her erstwhile
simpleness. I have heard the story told by one which had it of the
Prince in question. The lady too had confided it to him; and he had
chid her, counselling her that in such affairs one should never consult
the husband, who was of necessity a prejudiced party.

Not less simple-minded, or very little, was another young married
dame I have heard of, to whom one day an honourable gentleman did
proffer his love, at the husband’s very elbow, who for the moment
was holding discourse with another lady. The suitor did suddenly put
_son instrument entre les mains. Elle le prit et, le serrant fort
étroitement et se tournant vers son mari, lui dit: “Mon mari, voyez le
beau présent que me fait ce gentilhomme; le recevraije? dites-le-moi.”
Le pauvre gentilhomme, étonné, retire à soi son épervier de si grande
rudesse que, recontrant une pointe de diamant qu’elle avait au doigt,
le lui esserta de telle façon d’un bout à l’autre qu’elle le crut
perdre du tout_, and suffered very great pain and even came in danger
of his life. He rushed frantically from the room, watering all the
place with his gore which flowed in torrents. The husband made no ado
about running after him to utter any recriminations on the matter; all
he did was to burst out a-laughing heartily, at once at the simplicity
of his poor little wife, and because the fellow was so soundly punished.

Well! here is a village story I must needs tell, for ’tis not a bad
one. A village wench, as they were leading her to church on her
wedding-day to the sound of tabor and flute, and with much rustic
ceremony, chancing to catch sight of her girlhood’s lover, did shout
out these words to him, “Farewell, Pierre, farewell! I’ve got....
You’ll never give it me any more. My mother’s married me now,”—blurting
the word right out. Her simplicity was no less admirable than the soft
regret she showed for past days.

One more, as we are on village tales. A pretty young girl took a
load of wood to sell at the market town. Asked how much, she kept
continually raising her price at each offer made her by the dealers.
“You shall have so much,” they cried, “and something else into the
bargain.”—“’Tis well said,” she cried, “and thank you! you’re the very
man.”

Right simple-minded wenches these, and very different, they and their
like, (for there be plenty such), from a whole host of others in this
wicked world, which be far more double-dealing and knowing than these,
never asking counsel of their husbands nor never showing them such
presents as they may get.

I heard an anecdote once in Spain of a young girl who the first night
after her marriage, as her husband was struggling and sweating sore
and hurting himself in his attempts, did set up a laugh and tell him,
_Señor, bien es razon que seays martyr, pues que io soy virgen; mas
pues que io tomo la paciencia, bien la podeys tomar_,—“Sir, ’tis but
right you should be a martyr, since I am a virgin; but as I am so
patient, you must be patient too.” Thus in revenge of his making fun
of his wife, did she make fine fun of him. And in good sooth many a
girl hath good cause to make mock at such a time, especially when they
have learned afore what it all is, or have been informed of others, or
have themselves dreamed and pictured out this mighty moment of delight,
which they do suppose so great and lasting.

Another Spanish bride, telling over next morning her husband’s merits,
found several to praise, “only” she added, “_que no era buen contador
aritmetico, porque no sabia multiplicar_,—that he was not a good
arithmetician at all, for he couldn’t multiply.”

Another young maid of good birth and family (one myself have known
and talked with), on her wedding night, when all the company were
listening outside the door according to custom, and the husband had
just given her the first embrace, and as he did rest a while, though
not yet asleep, asked her if she would like some more of the same, “An
if it please you, Sir!” she said. Imagine the gallant bridegroom’s
astonishment at such an answer, and how he must have rubbed his ears.

Maids which do say such tricky things so readily and so soon after
marriage, may well rouse strange suspicions in their poor husbands’
breasts, and lead them to suppose they be not the first that have
dropped anchor in their bay, nor will be the last so to do. For we
cannot doubt, an if a man do not strive hard and nigh kill himself to
work well his wife, she will soon bethink her of giving him a pair of
pretty horns, or as an old French proverb put it,

                    Et qui ne la contente pas,
                    Va ailleurs chercher son repas.

Yet when a woman doth get all ever she can out of a man, she doth knock
him clean over, just doing him to death. ’Tis an old saying: A woman
should not take of a lover all she would have, but must spare him what
she can; not so with an husband, him she should drain to the very
bones. And this is why, as the Spanish saw hath it, _que el primero
pensamiento de la muger, luego que es casada, es de embiudarse_.—“A
married woman’s first thought is to contrive to make herself a widow.”
This saying is not universally true, as I do hope to show in another
place; it doth only apply to some women, and not all.

Some girls there be which, when no longer able to restrain themselves,
be ready to give themselves only to Princes and great Lords, folk
very meet to stir their passion, both by reason of their gracious
condescension and the fine presents they make, as well as for love
of their good looks and pretty ways, for indeed all is fine and
point-device, though they may be silly coxcombs and no more, as myself
have seen some. Other girls again do not seek after such at all, but
do rather avoid them all they can, because they have something of
a repute for being scandal-mongers, great boasters, indiscreet and
garrulous. They do prefer instead simple gentlemen of prudent and
discreet complexion, but alas! the number of such is very small. Happy
she who doth meet with such an one! To avoid all these inconveniences,
girls do choose, (at least some do) their men-servants, some being
handsome men, some not,—and I have myself known ladies which have acted
so. Nor doth it take much urgency to persuade the fellows; for putting
them to bed and getting them up as they do, undressing them, putting
their foot-gear on and off, and even changing their shifts,—and I have
seen many young girls at Court and elsewhere which did make no sort of
difficulty or scruple about all this,—seeing so many pretty sights as
they must, they cannot but feel temptation. And I ween some of their
mistresses do of set purpose let them see their charms freely. The end
can only be that, when the eyes have done their office, other senses be
presently called in to execute theirs.

I knew once a fair damsel of the great world, a beauty if ever there
was one, which did make her man-servant share her with a great Prince,
who kept her as his mistress and supposed he was the only happy
possessor of her favours. But herein the valet marched step by step
with him; and indeed she had made no ill choice, so handsome a man was
he and of so fine a figure; indeed, no difference was to be noted. In
fact the valet did have the advantage of the Prince in many beauties
of person; and the latter knew never a word about the intimacy till he
finally quitted the lady on his marriage. Nor did he for this treat
the man any the worse, but was always glad to see him; and whenever he
caught sight of him in passing, he would merely cry, “Is it possible
now this fellow was my rival? Well, well! I can quite believe it, for
barring my rank, he hath the better of me otherwise.” He bore the same
name as the Prince, and was a most excellent tailor, one of the most
famous at Court. There was hardly a woman there, single or married,
but he did dress them, when they were for exquisite costumes. I cannot
tell whether he was used to dress them in the same fashion he dressed
his mistress, but they were invariably well put on.

I knew once a young girl of a good house, which had a boy lackey of
only fourteen, whom she had made her fool and plaything. Amid their
plays and foolings, she did make no kind of difficulty whatever to let
him kiss her, as privily as it had been only a woman,—and this very
often before company, excusing it all by saying he was her pretty fool
and little playmate. I wot not whether he went further, but I do know
that afterward, as wife and widow, and wife once more, she was ever a
most notable whore. Remember how she did kindle her match at this first
fire, so that she did never after lack flame in any of her later and
greater passions and escapades. I had tarried a good year before I saw
this lady; but when I did behold her at home and with her mother, who
had the repute of being one of the most accomplished of sham prudes of
her day, laughing and making light of the whole thing, I did foresee in
a moment how this little game would lead to a more serious one, and one
played in downright earnest, and that the damsel would one day grow a
very glutton at it, as was afterward the case.

I knew two sisters of a very good old family in Poitou, and both
unmarried, of whom strange tales were told, and particularly with
regard to a tall Basque footman of their father’s. This fellow, under
pretext of his fine dancing, (for he could dance not only his native
_brawls_, but all the other dances as well), would commonly take them
out to dance and teach them the steps and be partner to them. Later he
did teach them the harlot’s reel, and they gat themselves finely talked
about. Still they found no difficulty in getting husbands, for they
were very wealthy folk; and this word wealth covereth up all defects,
so as men will pick up anything, no matter how hot and scalding. I knew
the said Basque afterward as a good soldier and brave man, and one that
showed he had had some training. He was dismissed his place, to avoid
scandal, and became a soldier in the Guard in M. d’Estrozze’s regiment.

I knew likewise another great house, and a noble, the lady mistress
whereof did devote herself to bringing up young maids of birth in her
household, amongst others sundry kinswomen of her husband’s. Now the
lady being very sickly and a slave to doctors and apothecaries, there
was always plenty of these to be found thereabouts. Moreover young
girls be subject to frequent sicknesses, such as pallors, anæmia,
fevers and the like, and it so happened two of them fell ill of a
quartan ague, and were put under the charge of an apothecary to cure
them. And he did dose them well with his usual drugs and medicines;
but the best of all his remedies was this, that he did sleep with one
of them,—the presumptuous villain, for he had to do with as fair and
honourable a maid as any in France, and one a great King had been well
content to enjoy; yet must Master Apothecary have his will of her.

Myself knew the damsel, who did certainly deserve a better lover. She
was married later, and given out for virgin,—and virgin she was found
to be. Herein did she show her cunning to some purpose; for _car,
puisqu’elle ne pouvait tenir son eau, elle s’adressa à celui qui
donnait les antidotes pour engarder d’engrosser, car c’est ce que les
filles craignent le plus: dont en cela il y en a de si experts qui leur
donnent des drogues qui les engardent très bien d’engrosser; ou bien,
si elles engrossent, leur font écouler leur grossesse so subtilement et
si sagement que jamais on ne s’en aperçoit, et n’en sent-on rien que le
vent_.

_Ainsi que j’en ai ouï parler d’une fille, laquelle avait été autrefois
nourrie fille de la feue reine de Navarre Marguerite. Elle vint par
cas fortunt, ou à engrosser sans qu’elle y pensât pourtant. Elle
rencontra un rusé apothicaire, qui, lui ayant donné un breuvage, lui
fit évader son fruit, qui avait déjà six mois, pièce par pièce, morceau
par morceau, si aisément, qu’étant en ses affaires jamais elle n’en
sentit ni mal ni douleur; et puis après se maria galamment, sans que
le mari y connut aucune trace; car on leur donne des remèdes pour se
faire paraître vierges et pucelles comme auparavant, ainsi que j’en
ai allégué un au_ DISCOUPS DES COCUS. _Et un que j’en ouï dire à un
empirique ces jours passés, qu’il faut avoir des sangsues et les
mettre à la nature, et faire par là tirer et sucer le sang: lesquelles
sangsues, en suçant, laisent et engendrent de petites ampoules et
fistules pleines de sang; si bien que le galant mari, qui vient le
soir des noces les assaillir, leur crève ces ampoules d’où le sang
sort, et lui et elle s’ensanglantent, qui est une grande joie à l’un
et à l’autre; et par ainsi,_ l’honor della citella è salva. _Je trouve
ce remède plus souverain que l’autre, s’il est vrai; et s’ils ne sont
bons tous deux, il y en a cent autres qui sont meilleurs, ainsi que
le savent très bien ordonner, inventer et appliquer ces messieurs les
médecins savants et experts apothicaires. Violà pourquoi ces messieurs
ont ordinairement de très belles et bonnes fortunes, car ils savent
blesser et remédier, ainsi qui fit la lance de Pélias._

Myself knew the Apothecary I spake of but now, as to whom I will add
only one word more in passing,—how I saw him at Geneva the first time I
did visit Italy, for at that time the common road for French travellers
thither was by Switzerland and the Grisons, because of the wars then
raging. He came to see me at my lodging. Of a sudden I did ask him what
he was doing in that town, and whether he was there to medicine pretty
girls, the same as he had done in France. He answered me he was there
to repent of such misdoings. “What!” said I, “you have not such dainty
bits to taste here as you had there?”—“Ah! Sir,” he replied, “’tis
because God hath called me, and I am enlightened of his spirit, and I
have now knowledge of his Holy Word.”—“Yes! yes!” I went on, “in those
days too you were a pious Protestant, and did combine medicine for the
body and for the soul, preaching to the girls and giving them some fine
instruction.”—“But, my dear Sir, I do know my God better these days,”
he returned again, “than then, and would fain sin no more.” I need not
repeat much other discourse we had on this subject, both seriously and
in jest; but the impudent scamp did certainly enjoy that pretty bit of
flesh, more meet for some gallant gentleman than for such as he. It
was as well for him he did quit that house pretty smartly; else had he
fared ill. However, enough of this. Cursed be the fellow, for the hate
and envy I do bear him,—as did M. de Ronsard to a physician which was
used to come night and morning rather to see the poet’s mistress, and
feel her breasts and bosom and rounded arm, than to medicine her for
the fever she had. He writ a very charming sonnet on the subject; ’tis
in the second book of his _Amours_, and begins thus:

              Hé que je porte et de hayne et d’envie
              Au médecin qui vient et matin,
              Sans nul propos, tastonner le tétin,
              Le sein, le ventre et les flancs de ma mye.

I do bear a like fierce jealousy against a physician which did
similarly toward a fair and noble lady I was enamoured of,[91*] and
from whom I never gat any such privileges and familiarities, though
I had loved them better than the winning of a little kingdom. These
gentry are for sure exceeding agreeable to dames and damsels, and do
have fine adventures with them, an if they seek after such. I have
known two physicians at Court, one M. Castellan, physician to the Queen
Mother, the other the Seigneur Cabrian, physician to M. de Nevers, and
who had held the same office with Ferdinand de Gonzague. Both have
enjoyed successes with women, by all one hears, that the greatest
noblemen at Court would have sold their souls to the devil for to have
gone shares with them.

We were discoursing one day, the late Baron de Vitaux and myself, with
M. Le Grand, a famous physician of Paris, a man of agreeable manners
and excellent counsel, he having come to visit the said Baron, who
was ill of some amorous indiscretion. Both of us questioning him on
sundry little ways and peculiarities of the ladies, he did entertain
us finely, and told us a round dozen of tales that did verily take the
prize. So engrossed did he grow herewith, that, nine o’clock striking,
he cried, getting up from the chair where he was seated: “Truly, I am a
greater simpleton than you two, which have kept me here two good hours
chattering with you rascals, and all the while I have been forgetting
six or seven sick folk I am bound to go visit.” So with a word of
farewell, he doth hie him away, though not without a further last word
in reply to us, when we called after him: “Rascal yourself, Doctor! Oh!
you doctors know some fine things and do ’em too, and you especially,
for you talk like a past master of the art.” He answered us, looking
down, “True enough, true enough! we both know and do some fine doings,
for we do possess sundry secrets not open to all the world. But I’m
an old man now, and have bid a long farewell to Venus and her boy.
Nowadays I leave all this to you younger rascals.”


                                  2.

We read in the life of St. Louis, in the History of Paulus Aemilius, of
a certain Marguerite, Countess of Flanders, sister of Jeanne, daughter
of Baldwin I., Emperor of the Greeks, and his successor, seeing she
had no children,—so says History. She was given in her early girlhood
a teacher named Guillaume, a man esteemed of an holy life and who had
already taken minor orders. Yet did this in no wise hinder him to get
two children of his fair pupil, which were christened Baldwin and John,
and all so privily as that few folk knew aught of the matter. The two
boys were later declared legitimate by the Pope. What fine teaching,
and what a teacher! So much for History.

I knew a great Lady at Court which had the repute of being over
familiar with her reader and teacher,—so much so indeed that one day
Chicot, the King’s jester,[92*] did openly reproach her therewith in
presence of his Majesty and many other personages of the Court, asking
her if she were not ashamed to have herself loved (saying the word
right out) of so ugly and base a loon as yonder fellow, and if she
had not wit to choose a better man. The company hereon began to laugh
uproariously and the lady to weep, supposing that the King had abetted
the game; for strokes of the sort were quite in character with his
usual play. Other very great ladies and high Princesses I have known,
which every day would amuse themselves with making their Secretaries,
whom I have likewise known, write, or rather pretend to write, and have
fine games. Or if they did not call for them to write, having naught to
say, then would they make them read aloud, for to give a better colour
to the whole thing, declaring how reading themselves did weaken their
sight.

Great ladies which do make choice of suchlike paramours be quite
inexcusable and most blameworthy, seeing they have their liberty of
action, and full freedom and opportunity to choose whom they will. But
poor girls which be abject slaves of father and mother, kinsfolk and
guardians and mistresses, and timid to boot, are constrained to pick up
any stone they can find for their purpose, never thinking whether it
be cold or hot, roast or boiled. And so, according as occasion offer,
they do generally resort to their men-servants, to their school-master
and teacher, to fellows of the artist craft, lute-players, fiddlers,
dancing masters, painters, in a word their different instructors in
knowledge and accomplishments, and even sometimes preachers of religion
and holy monks, as Boccaccio doth describe and the Queen of Navarre
in her _Nouvelles_. The like is done by pages, as myself have noted,
lackeys, and especially stage-players, with whom I have known two maids
of honour desperately in love and not scrupling to indulge the same.
Poets too I have known in some cases to have debauched fair maids,
wives and widows.

These do fondly love to be praised and worshipped, and with this bait
are caught, as indeed by almost any they do find convenient and can
attract to them. Lawyers again be very dangerous folk in these matters.

Now note why ’tis Boccaccio and other writers with him do find maids
to be more constant in love and more steadfast than wives or widows.
’Tis because they do resemble persons afloat on a river in a sinking
boat. They that cannot swim at all do spring at the first branches
they can catch hold of, and do grasp these firmly and obstinately till
they see help arrive. Others that can swim, do leap into the water and
strike out boldly till they have reached the bank. Even so young maids,
whenas they have gotten a lover, do hold and keep him steadfastly, the
one they have first chose, and will in no wise let him go, but love
him steadfastly. This cometh of the dread that, having no free choice
and proper opportunity, they may not be able, an if they lose him, to
get another such as they would wish. Whereas married women and widows,
which do know the wiles of love and are well experienced, and have full
liberty and all convenience to swim in all waters without danger, may
choose what mate they please; and if they weary of one lover or lose
him, why! they can straight get another, or even take two. For with
them ’tis ever a case of “one lost, two got back.”

Beside, young girls have not the means, the money and crown-pieces,
to win them new lovers every day; for all ever they can give their
lovers is some small gift of a lock of hair, a little seed pearl
or so, a bracelet, a small ring or a scarf, or other insignificant
presents that cost almost naught. For high-born as a girl may be (I
have seen it myself), and no matter of how great an house and how
rich an heiress, she is kept so short of money, by father, mother,
kinsfolk or guardians, as the case may be, that she simply hath not
the means to give much to her lover, nor scarce ever to untie her
purse widely,—unless it be her purse in front. Besides, girls be of
themselves miserly, if for no other reason, yet because they be forced
to it, having scarce any means of extravagance; for generosity in
giving doth rest and depend above all on the ability to gratify it. On
the contrary wives and widows can dispose of their wealth very freely,
when they have any; and above all, when they have fancied a man, and
be taken with passion and caprice for him, there is naught they will
not sell and give away to the very shift on their back, rather than not
have enjoyment of him. Herein they are just like gluttons and folk that
be slaves of their mouths, who taking a fancy to a tid-bit, must have
the same, no matter what it cost them at the market. Poor maids be in
quite other case; whatsoever they can get, be it good or bad, this must
they stop and buy.

I could bring forward a whole host of their intrigues, and their divers
appetites and curious preferences. But I should never get me done at
that rate; beside what would such tales be worth, unless the subjects
were given by name and surname. But this is a thing I will not do at
any price, for I desire to bring shame on no woman; and I have made
profession to avoid in this my book all evil-speaking whatsoever,
so that none may have aught to reproach me with on the score of
scandal-mongering. However to tell my tales, suppressing the names,
in this can be no harm. I do leave my readers to guess the persons
intended; and many a time they will suppose it to be one, though all
the while ’tis quite another.


                                  3.

Now just as we do see different sorts of wood of such different nature,
that some will burn when quite green, as the ash and the beech, but
others, be they as dry, old and well seasoned as you please, for
instance the elm, the alder and others, do burn only as slowly and
tediously as possible, while many others, following the general nature
of all dry and old wood, do blaze up in their dryness and oldness so
rapidly and suddenly ’tis rather a destroying and instant reducing
to ashes than burning proper, so is the like true of women, whether
maids, wives or widows. Some, so soon as ever they be come to the first
greenness of their age, do burn so easily and well, you would say from
their very mother’s womb they do draw thence an amorousness; as did the
fair Laïs from her fair mother Tymandra, that most famous harlot, and
an hundred thousand others which herein do take after the good whores
their mothers. Nay! sometimes they do not so much as wait for the age
of maturity, that may be put at twelve or thirteen, to begin loving,
but are at it sooner yet. This happened not twelve years agone at Paris
to a pastry-cook’s child, which was discovered to be pregnant at nine
years of age.[93] The girl being very sick with her pregnancy, and her
father having taken a specimen of her urine to a physician, the latter
said at once she had no other sickness but only that she was with
child. “What!” cried the father; “Why, Sir! my daughter is only nine
years old.” Who so astonished as the doctor? “’Tis all one,” said he;
“of a surety, she is with child.” And after examining her more closely,
he did indeed find her so. The child afterward confessing with whom she
had had to do, her gallant was condemned to death by the judges, for
having gone with her at so very tender an age. I much regret I have
come to give this example and mention the thing here, seeing I had made
up my mind not to sully my paper with suchlike mean folk, but to deal
only with great and well-born persons.

Herein I have somewhat gone wide of my purpose, but the story being so
rare and uncommon, I must e’en be excused.

This doth remind me of a tale of a brave and gallant Lord if ever
there was one, since dead, which was one day making complaint of the
amplitude of women’s affairs with whom he had had to do, as well
maids as married ladies. He declared ’twould come to his having to
look for mere children, just come from the cradle so to speak, so as
not to find so wide a space of open sea as he had done with the rest,
but get better pleasure by swimming in a narrow strait. An if he had
addressed these words to a certain great and honourable dame I do know,
she would have made him the same answer she did to another gentleman
of the great world, to whom, on his making a like complaint, she did
retort thus: “I wot not which hath better cause of complaint, you men
of our width and over amplitude, or we women of your tenuity and over
smallness, or rather your tiny, tiny littleness; truly we have as much
to lament in you as ever you in us.”

The lady was right enough in what she said. Similarly another great
lady, one day at Court looking curiously at the great bronze Hercules
in the fountain at Fontainebleau, as she was a-walking with an
honourable gentleman which did escort her, his hand beneath her arm,
did complain that the said Hercules, albeit excellently well wrought
and figured otherwise, was not so well proportioned in all his members
as should be, forasmuch as his middle parts were far too small and out
of proper measure, in no wise corresponding to his huge colossus of a
body. The gentleman replied he did not agree with what she said, for
’twas to be supposed that in those days ladies were not so wide as at
the present.

A very great lady and noble Princess[94] learning how that certain folk
had given her name to a huge great culverin, did ask the reason why.
Whereupon one present answered: “’Tis for this, Madam, because it hath
a calibre greater and wider than all the rest.”

_Si est-ce pourtant qu’elles y ont trouvé assez de remède, et en
trouvent tous les jours assez pour rendre leurs portes plus étroites,
carrées et plus malaisées d’entrée; dont aucunes en usent, et d’autres
non; mais nonobstant, quand le chemin y est bien battu et frayé souvent
par continuelle habitation et fréquentation, ou passages d’enfants, les
ouvertures de plusieurs en sont toujours plus grandes et plus larges.
Je me suis là un peu perdu et dévoyé; mais puisque ç’a été à propos il
n’y a point de mal, et je retourne à mon chemin._

Many other young girls there be which let safely pass this early,
tender, sappy time of life, waiting a greater maturity and dryness,
whether because they be naturally cold at first beginning and start,
or that they be kept close guarded, as is very needful with some.
Others there be so steadfast, the winds and tempests of winter would
avail naught to shake or stir them. Others again be so foolish and
simple-minded, so raw and ignorant, as that they would not so much as
hear the name of love. So have I heard of a woman which did affect the
virtuous prude, that an if she did hear the word harlot mentioned, she
would instantly faint. A friend telling this story to a certain great
Lord in presence of his wife, the latter did exclaim: “She’d better not
come here, that woman; for if she doth faint to hear speak of whores,
she’ll die right out to see one.”

On the other hand there be some girls which from the first moment
they begin to feel they have a heart, grow so tame they will eat from
the hand at once. Others be so devout and scrupulous, fearing so sore
the commandments of the Lord our God, that they do quite neglect
that of love. Yet have I seen many of these same devout patterers of
prayers, these women that be forever a-kissing of images and all but
living in churches, which did under this hypocritical veil cover and
conceal the fire of their passions, to the end that by such false and
feigned semblance the world might perceive never a trace of them,
but deem them perfect prudes, or even half way to being saints like
St. Catherine of Sienna, by the which professions they have often
succeeded in deceiving all mankind. Thus have I heard it related of a
very great Princess, a Queen indeed, now dead, who when she was fain
to make love to any man, (for she was exceeding given that way), would
invariably begin her conversation with the love we do owe to God, and
then suddenly bring it round to carnal love, and what she did want of
her interlocutor, whereof she did before long come to the practice or
quintessential part. This is how these devotees, or bigots rather, do
cajole us men; such of us that is as be not well versed in wiles of the
sort and know not life.

I have heard a tale, though I wot not if it be true. Anyway of late
years, on occasion of a general procession at a certain city, was seen
a woman, well born or not, bare-footed and in great contrition, playing
the penitent with might and main,—and it was in Lent. Straight from
there she hied her away to dine with her lover on a quarter of kid and
a ham. The savour did penetrate to the street, and going up to her
chamber, folk found her in the midst of this glorious feast. She was
arrested and condemned to be led through the town with the joint on a
spit over her shoulder and the ham hanging at her neck. Was not this a
meet and proper punishment?

Other ladies there be so proud and haughty they do scorn heaven and
earth in a way of speaking, and utterly snub and reject men and all
their offers. But for such all that is need is to wait and have
patience and perseverance, for with these and time you do surely
subdue them and find them humble enough at last, for ’tis the property
of highmindedness and pride, after much swelling and exaltation,
presently to come down and bate its lofty claims. And with these same
proud dames, I have seen many instances where after scorning love
and all that spake to them thereof, they have given in and loved like
any others, or have even wedded husbands of mean estate and in no way
their equals. Thus doth Love make mock of them and punish them for
their hard-heartedness, taking especial delight in attacking them more
than other folk, forasmuch as the victory is then a prouder one, as
vanquishing pride.

I knew erstwhile a Court damsel, so proud and scornful that when some
gallant man of the world would come to address her and speak of love,
she would ever answer him so haughtily and with so great contempt, in
words so fierce and arrogant (for she had a gift of speech as good
as any), that presently they did cease altogether. But an if any did
chance now and again still to try and vanquish her pride, ’twas a sight
how she would snub them and send them packing with words and looks and
scornful gestures; for she was very clever at this game. In the end
Love did surprise and sore punish her, for she gave in to one which did
get her with child some score of days only before her marriage; yet
was this lover in no wise to be compared with many other honourable
gentlemen which had aforetime been fain to be her suitors. Herein
we can only say with Horace, _sic placet Veneri_, “such is Venus’
pleasure,”—for these be miracles.

’Twas my humour once while at Court to be lover to a fair and honorable
damsel, accomplished and expert if ever woman was, and of a very good
house, but proud and highhanded; and I was very much smit with her
indeed. I did make up my mind to court her, but alway to deal with her
in the same arrogant spirit she did use in her words and answers to
me,—as the proverb saith, “When Greek meets Greek.” Yet did she show
no resentment for all this, for indeed, all the while I was treating
her so cavalierly, I was used to praise her exceedingly, seeing there
is naught doth more soften a woman’s heart than commendation whether of
her beauty and charms or of her proud spirit, even declaring how that
her port did much become her, forasmuch as she kept her from all common
familiarity, and that any woman, damsel or dame, which did make her too
common and familiar, not maintaining a haughty port and high repute,
was not worthy to be so courted. For all which I did but respect her
the more, and would never call her by any other name but _my lady
Disdain_. Whereat she was so well pleased she did herself likewise
choose to call me always _Master Arrogance_.

So ever continuing, I did court her long and faithfully; and I may
boast me I had as large a share of her good graces as any great Lord
at Court which did care to court her, or larger. However a chief
favourite of the King, a brave and gallant gentleman without a doubt,
did take her from me, and by favour of his King did win and marry her.
Natheless, so long as she did live, the connection was ever kept up
betwixt us, and I have always honoured her well. I know not an if I
shall be blamed for having told this tale, for ’tis a common saying
that all tales about a man’s self be bad. Anyway I have let it out this
time; as indeed throughout my book I have related not a few stories of
myself in divers relations, though I do generally suppress the name.

Other girls there be again of so merry a complexion and so
lighthearted, so devoted to amusement and enjoyment, they never have
another thought in their heads but to laugh, and make sport and
pastime, and never time to hear or dream of anything else but only
their little amusements. I have known many such which had rather hear
a fiddle play, or dance or leap or run, than hearken to any love
discourse whatsoever; while other some do so adore the chase they
should better be called servants of Diana than of Venus. I did once
know a brave and valiant Lord, since dead, which fell so deep in love
with a maid, and a great lady to boot, that he was like to die; “for
whenas I am fain,” he used to say, “to declare my passion, she doth
answer me never a word but about her dogs and her hunting. I would to
heaven I were metamorphosed into a hunting-dog or greyhound, and my
soul entered in their body, according to Pythagoras’ opinion, to the
end she might give some heed to my love, and I be healed of my wound.”
Yet afterward did he leave her, for he was not good lackey or huntsman
enough to go everywhere a-following her about, wherever her lusty
humours, her pleasures and amusements might lead her.

Yet must we note one fact. Maids of this sort, after leaving their
chickenhood behind and outgrowing the pip, (as we say of poultry),
having taken their fill of these childish amusements, do always come,
at long last, to essay a woman’s pleasures too. Such young girls do
resemble little wolf-cubs, which be so pretty, engaging and playful in
their downy youth; yet being come to maturity, they do ever take to
evil courses and ravening and killing. The sort of girls I am speaking
of do ever the like, who after much sport and youthful merriment,
after pleasures of all kinds, hunting, dancing, leaping, skipping and
jigging, do always, I ween, indulge at last in dame Venus’ gentle
sport. In a word, to put it briefly, scarce ever a one of the sex is
seen, maid, wife or widow, but sooner or later she and all her sisters
do burn, in season or out of season,—as do all woods, excepting only
one, yclept the _larix_, the which they do in no wise resemble.

Now this Larix is a wood which will never burn, and maketh neither
fire, flame nor ash, as Julius Cæsar did find. On his return back
from Gaul, he had ordered the inhabitants of Piedmont to furnish him
vivers, and establish magazines on his main line of march. He was duly
obeyed, except by the garrison of a castle called _Larignum_, whither
had withdrawn certain ill-disposed rascals, recusants and rebels, the
result being Cæsar had to turn back and besiege the place. Coming nigh
the fortress, he saw its defences were only of wood, whereat he did
straightway make mock, deeming they would immediately take the same.
Wherefore he did give orders at once to collect large plenty of fagots
and straw to set fire to the bulwarks, and soon was there so huge a
conflagration and mass of flame that all hoped soon to see the ruin and
destruction of the fort. But lo! whenas the fire was burned out and
the flame disappeared, all were exceeding astonished, for they beheld
the stronghold in the same state as before and quite unhurt, neither
burned nor ruined one whit. This did compel Cæsar to resort to other
means, mining to wit, which did at last bring those within to come to
terms and render up the place. From this Cæsar did learn the virtues of
this larix-wood, from the which the castle had its name of _Larignum_,
because it was built and defended of the same.

I ween there be many fathers, mothers, kinsmen and husbands, that would
dearly like their daughters and wives should share the properties
of this wood, that they should burn fiercely without its leaving
mark or effect behind. They would have a far more unruffled mind and
not so many suspicions a-buzzing in their heads, nor would there be
so many whores on show nor cuckolds before the world. But ’tis not
really desirable in any shape or form, for the world would be clean
depopulated, and folk would live therein like blocks of stone, without
pleasure or satisfaction. So many persons I wot of, of either sex,
would say; and indeed Nature would be left imperfect, instead of very
perfect as she is. Following her kindly lead as our best captain, we
need never fear to lose the right path.




       [Illustration: Decorative scrollwork above chapter start]




                              ARTICLE III

                         OF THE LOVE OF WIDOWS


                                  1.

Well! enough said of maids; ’tis but right we now proceed to speak of
widows in their turn.

The love of widows is good, easy and advantageous, seeing they be in
full liberty of action, and in no sense slaves of fathers, mothers,
brothers, kinsmen and husbands, nor yet of any legal bar, a still more
important point. A man may make love and lie with a widow as much as
ever he please, he is liable to no penalty, as he is with maids or
married women. In fact the Romans, which people hath given us the
most of the laws we have, did never make this act punishable, either
in person or property. I have this from a great lawyer, who did cite
Papinian for confirmation of the point, that great Roman jurisconsult,
who treating of adultery declares; if occasionally under this term
adultery hath been inadvertently included lawless intercourse with maid
or widow, ’tis a misuse of words. In another passage the same authority
saith: the heir hath no right of reproach or concern with the character
of the deceased man’s widow, except only if the deceased had in his
lifetime brought action against his wife on this ground; then could the
said heir take up and carry on the prosecution, but not otherwise. And
as a fact in all the whole of Roman law is no penalty ordained for the
widow, except only for one that did marry again within the year of her
mourning, or who without re-marrying had borne a child subsequently
to the eleventh month of her first year of widowhood, this first year
being deemed sacred to the honour of her former husband. There was
likewise a law made by Heliogabalus, that no widow must marry again for
one year after the death of her husband, to the end she might have due
leisure to bewail his loss and deliberate carefully on the choice of a
successor. A truly paternal law, and an excellent reason i’ faith! As
for a widow’s original dowry, the heir could not in any case rob her
thereof, even though she should have given her person to every possible
form of naughtiness. And for this my authority did allege a very good
reason; for the heir having no other thought but only the property, if
once a door were opened to him to accuse the widow in hope of making
her forfeit this and so rob her of her dowry, she would be exposed at
once to every calumny his malignity could invent. So there would be
never a widow, no matter how virtuous and unoffending, could safeguard
her from slanderous actions on the part of enterprising heirs.

All this would seem to show, I think, that the Roman ladies did have
good opportunities and occasion for self-indulgence. No need then
to be astonished if one of them, in the reign of Marcus Aurelius,
(as is found writ in that Emperor’s life), as she was walking in her
husband’s funeral procession, and in the midst of all her cries,
sobs, sighs, tears and lamentations, did so strictly press the hand
of the gentleman which was her escort, as to surely signify thereby
her willingness for another taste of love and marriage. Accordingly
at the end of a year,—for he could not marry her before, without
a special dispensation, as was done for Pompey whenas he did wed
Cæsar’s daughter, but this was scarce ever given but to the greatest
personages,—he did marry the lady, having meantime enjoyed some
dainty foretastes, and picked many an early loaf out of the batch,
as the saying goes. Mighty fain was this good lady to lose naught by
procrastination, but take her measures in good time; yet for all this,
she did lose never a doit of her property and original dowry.

Thus fortunate were Roman widows,—as are still in the main their
French sisters, which for giving heart and fair body satisfaction,
do lose naught of their rights; albeit several cases hereanent have
been pleaded before our parliaments. Thus I wot of a great and
wealthy French Lord, which did carry on a long process against his
sister-in-law concerning her dowry, charging her that her life had
been lascivious and with another crime of a less gay sort to boot.
Natheless did she win her case; and the brother-in-law was obliged to
dower her handsomely and give her all that did belong to her. Yet was
the governance of her son and daughter taken from her, seeing she had
married again. This the judges and noble councillors of the parliaments
do look to, forbidding widows that re-marry to have guardianship of
their children. In spite of this I do know of widows which within
the last few years have successfully asserted their rights, though
re-married, over their daughters being under age, against their
brothers-in-law and other kinsmen; but then they were greatly helped by
the influence of the Prince which was their protector. Indeed there is
never a law a fine _motte_ cannot traverse. Of these subjects I do now
refrain me from speaking more, seeing ’tis not my trade; so thinking
to say something mighty clever, ’tis very like I may say what is quite
from the point. I do refer me to our great men of the law.

Now of our widows some be alway glad to try marriage once again and run
its risks, like mariners that twice, thrice and four times saved from
shipwreck do again and again go back to the sea, and as married women
do, which in the pains of motherhood do swear and protest they will
never, never go back to it again, and no man shall ever be aught to
them, yet no sooner be they sound and clean again, but they take to the
same old dance once more. So a Spanish lady, being in her pangs, had a
candle lighted in honour of Our Lady of Mont-Sarrat, who much succours
women in child-birth. Yet did she fail not to have sore pain and swear
right earnestly she would never go back to it any more. She was no
sooner delivered but turning to her woman who held the candle still
alight, she said, _Serra esto cabillo de candela para otra vez_, “Put
away that bit of candle for another time.”

Other ladies do prefer not to marry; and of these are always some, and
always have been, which coming to be widows in the flower of their age,
be content to stay so. Ourselves have seen the Queen Mother, which
did become a widow at the age of seven or eight and thirty years,
and did ever after keep that state; and fair, pleasant and agreeable
as she was, did never so much as think of any man to be her second
husband. No doubt it may be said on the other side,—Whom could she
have wedded suitable to her lofty estate and comparable with the great
King Henri, her late lord and master; beside she would thereby have
lost the government of the Kingdom, which was better worth than an
hundred husbands, and its enjoyment more desirable and pleasant? Yet
is there no advantage Love doth not make women forget; wherefore she
is the more to be commended and worthy to be recorded in the temple of
fame and immortality. For she did master and command her passions,—not
like another Queen, which unable to restrain herself, did wed her own
steward of the household, by name the Sieur de Rabodanges.[95*] This
the King, her son, did at first beginning find exceeding strange and
bitter; but yet, because she was his mother, he did excuse and pardon
the said Rabodanges for having married her; and it was arranged that
by day, before the world, he should serve her alway as steward, not to
deprive her, being the King’s mother, of her proper state and dignity,
but by night she should make of him what pleased her, using him either
as servant or master at her choice, this being left to their own
discretion and good pleasure. We may readily imagine who was master
then; for every woman, be she as high-born as she may, coming to this
point, is ever subject to the superior male, according to the law of
nature and humanity in this matter. I have the tale from the late Grand
Cardinal de Lorraine, second of the name and title, which did tell it
at Poissy to King Francis II., the time he did institute the eighteen
knights of the Order of Saint Michael,—a very great number, and one
never seen or heard of before then.[96*] Among others was the Seigneur
de Rabodanges, a very old man, that had not been seen for years at
Court, except on occasion of some of our warlike expeditions, he having
withdrawn soon after the death of M. de Lautrec out of disappointment
and despite, a common enough case, having lost his good master, the
Captain of whose Guard he was, on his journey to the Kingdom of
Naples, where he died. And the Cardinal did further say he did believe
this M. de Rabodanges was descended of the marriage in question.—Some
while agone a lady of France did marry her page, so soon as ever his
pagehood was expired and he his own master, thinking she had worn her
widow’s weeds quite long enough.

Well, to leave this sort of widows, and say somewhat of more
high-minded and prudent dames.

We have had our Queen of France, Donna Isabelle of Austria, which was
wife to the late King Charles IX., whom we may in all ways declare to
have been one of the best, gentlest, wisest and most virtuous Queens
that ever reigned of all the Kings and Queens that ever were. This I
may confidently affirm, and every one that hath ever seen her or heard
her speak will say the same, and this without disparaging others and
with the most perfect truth. She was a very beautiful Princess, with
features and face as fair and delicate as any lady at the Court, and
most affable. Her figure too was very fine, albeit she did scarce reach
the middle height. She was very sensible and prudent moreover, most
virtuous and good-natured, and one that did never hurt or displeasure
any, or give offence by so much as the smallest word. And indeed she
was very careful of her speech, saying but very little and alway in her
native Spanish.

She was truly pious, but no wise bigoted, not overmuch manifesting her
religion by outward acts and shows, and an extremity of devotion, such
as I have seen some of our prayer-patterers display, but rather without
missing any of the regular hour for supplication to God, she did
employ these well and sufficiently, without going out of her way to
borrow other extraordinary ones. ’Tis very true, as I have heard some
of her ladies declare, that whenas she was to bed apart and hid, and
her curtains close drawn, she would kneel there devoutly in her shift
and make prayer to God by the space of an hour and a half, beating and
tormenting her breast in her zeal of devotion.

This habit had never been noted at all till after the death of King
Charles her husband. But one night after she had gone to bed and all
her women were retired, one of those which did sleep in her chamber,
hearing her sighing, did bethink her to peep between the curtains,
and saw her in the posture described, so praying and beseeching God,
which practice she did continue well nigh every evening. At length the
said bedchamber-woman, who was on very familiar terms with her, did
venture to remonstrate one day with her on the ground she was hurting
her health. The Queen was angered against the woman for her discovery
and advice, and fain almost to deny the thing, and did straitly charge
her to breathe never a word about it. Wherefore for that evening she
did desist; but in the night she did fully make up for it, supposing
her women would not observe it. But they saw her, and found how it was,
by the reflexion of her chamber-light of wax, the which she did keep
burning by her bedside next the wall, for to read in her Book of Hours
and pray God at whiles, using for this pious purpose the same space
where other Queens and Princesses do keep their table of refection.
Suchlike prayers do little resemble those of hypocrites, which wishing
to appear religious before the world, do make their orisons and
devotions publicly, and aye with mumbling of the lips, to the end folk
may deem them exceeding devout and sanctified.

Thus would our good Queen pray for the soul of the King, her husband,
whom she did sorely grieve for, yet all the whole making her moan
and lamentation not like a wild and desperate woman, screaming, and
tearing her cheeks and hair, nor yet merely counterfeiting one that
is commended for her tears, but sorrowing gently, dropping her fair
and precious tears so tenderly, sighing so soft and low, as that ’twas
plain to see she was restraining her grief all she could, to the end
people might not think her desirous of making a fine seeming and grand
impression (a thing I have seen many ladies do in such case), yet
failing not at all to convince all of the deep anguish of her heart.
Even so a torrent is ever more violent whose course is stayed than when
it hath free space to run in. I do well remember me how, all through
the King’s malady, her dear lord and husband, he lying in his bed and
she coming to visit him, she would quick sit her down by his side,
not close to his bed’s-head, as is usual, but a little withdrawn, yet
within his sight, where remaining without speaking scarce at all to
him, or he to her, she would keep her eyes all the while so fixed upon
him, that never taking them from off his face she did verily seem to
be warming him in her heart with the heat of all the love she bare
him. Presently she might be seen dropping tears so soft and secret,
that any which had not chanced to note them, would have never known
her grief. There would she sit, drying her wet eyes under pretence of
using her handkerchief, that ’twas downright pity to every soul there
(I saw the thing myself) to see her so troubled to hide her grief and
love, and prevent the King from seeing the signs of her sorrow. Such
was ever her practise in her husband’s sickness; whereafter she would
rise and hie her to her prayers for his restoration to health. She did
truly love and honour him exceedingly, albeit she knew him of amorous
complexion and that he had mistresses, whether for his renown or for
his pleasure. But yet was she never a whit less kind, nor ever said
an ill word to him, patiently bearing her little load of jealousy and
the wrong he did her. She was a very meet and proper mate for him;
for ’twas indeed fire and water come together in one, the King being
naturally quick, hot and stirring, she cool and temperate in all things.

I have been told on good authority, how that after her widowhood,
among certain of her more privy ladies, which were for giving her such
consolation as they could suggest, was one (for, as you may suppose,
among so great a band there will alway be one more maladroit than the
rest), which, thinking to please highly, did address her thus: “At
least, Madam, an if instead of a daughter he had but left you a son,
you would at this moment be the King’s Queen Mother, and your dignity
by so much increased and strengthened.”—But her answer was: “Alas!
alas! say not such a thing. As if France had not misfortunes enough
already, without my having caused yet another to be her utter ruin.
For had I had a son, this would only have mean more factions, troubles
and seditions for to get the care and guardianship of the young King
during his infancy and minority. Hence would have sprung more war and
strife than ever, each striving to make his profit and draw advantage
by plundering the poor child, as they were fain to do to the late King,
my husband, and would have done but for the Queen, his mother, and his
good servants which did oppose such doings. But an if I had had a son,
I should have but found unhappiness in the thought of having borne him,
and gotten a thousand maledictions of the people, whose voice is the
voice of God. Wherefore I tell you I do praise my God, and am right
thankful for the fruit he hath vouchsafed me, be it for better or for
worse to me in the end.” Such was the kindness of this good-hearted
Princess toward the country of her adoption.

I have likewise heard tell how at the massacre of the Saint
Bartholomew, the Queen, knowing naught of it and having never the least
suspicion in the world of what was plotting, did get her to bed in
her usual fashion. On her waking in the morning, she was first thing
informed of the fine mystery that was a-playing. “Woe is me!” she did
cry out instantly, “the King, my husband, doth he know of it?”—“Of a
surety, Madam,” came the answer; “’tis he that doth order it.”—“Great
God,” she cried in horror, “what thing is this? and what counsellors be
they which have given him this advice? Oh, God! I do beseech and pray
thee to pardon this sin, for an if Thou be not pitiful, this offence,
I fear me sore, is beyond all pardon.” Then she did quick ask for her
Book of Hours, and so to prayers and supplication to the Almighty, the
tears dropping from her eyes.

Prithee consider the wisdom and goodness the said Queen did manifest in
not approving of such a merrymaking and the cruel game that was played
thereat, and this although she had much cause to desire the utter
extermination of the Admiral (Coligny) and his fellow religionists,
seeing they were absolutely opposed in every way to her own faith,
the which she did adore and honour more than aught else in all the
world, and on the other hand because she could plainly see how they
did trouble the Kingdom of her gracious lord and husband. Moreover
the Emperor her father had actually said to her, as she was setting
forth with him on her way to France: “My daughter,” he said, “you are
going as Queen to a Kingdom the fairest, strongest and most puissant
in the world, and so far I do hold you a very happy woman. Yet would
you be happier still, an if you could but find it at peace within its
borders and as flourishing as erstwhile it was used to be. But you will
actually find it sorely torn, dismembered, divided and weakened, for
albeit the King, your future husband, is on the right side, yet the
Princes and Lords of the Protestant faith do much hurt and injury on
the other.” And indeed she did find it even as he said.

Being now a widow, many of the most clear-sighted folk I wot of at
Court, both men and women, did deem the new King, on his arrival
back from Poland, would marry her, in spite of the fact she was his
sister-in-law. But then he could well do so by virtue of the Pope’s
dispensation, who can do much in this respect, and especially where
great personages be concerned, in view of the public advantage
involved. And there were many reasons for concluding the said marriage,
the which I have left to more authoritative writers than myself to
deduce, without my alleging them here. But amongst others one of the
chiefest was to recognise by the marriage the great obligations the
King lay under to the Emperor on the occasion of his quitting Poland
for to return to France. For there can be no reasonable doubt, an if
the Emperor had chose to put the smallest obstacle in his path, he
would never have been able to get away and cross the frontier and
make his way to France. The Poles were anxious to keep him, only he
did leave them without ever a farewell; while the Germans were on the
watch on every side to capture him (as was done to the gallant King
Richard of England, on his return from the Holy Land, as we read in
our Chronicles), and would have certainly held him prisoner and made
him pay ransom, or maybe worse. For they were exceeding sore with
him, for the sake of the Feast of Saint Bartholomew,—or at any rate
the Protestant Princes were. However, he did voluntarily and without
ceremony throw himself suddenly on the protection of the Emperor, which
did receive him very graciously and lovingly, and with great honour
and much gracious familiarity, as if the twain had been brothers.
Then presently, after he had tarried with him some days, he did in
person convoy him a day or two’s journey on his way, and give him a
perfectly safe passage through his dominions, so by his favour he did
eventually win to Carinthia, the Venetian territories, Venice itself,
and presently his own kingdom.

Such was the obligation the King of France lay under to the Emperor,
one which many persons, as I have said, did suppose the former would
have paid back by binding yet firmer his alliance with him. But at
the time he went into Poland, he had seen at Blamont in Lorraine, the
fair Louise de Lorraine, Mademoiselle de Vaudémont, one of the most
beautiful, virtuous and accomplished Princess in all Christendom. On
her he did cast such ardent eyes as that being presently inflamed with
deepest love, and keeping his passion warm all the while he was away,
he did straightway on his return to Lyons despatch M. du Gua,[97*] one
of his chiefest favourites (as truly he did in every way deserve to
be), to Lorraine. Arrived there, he did settle and conclude the match
betwixt him and her very easily and with no great disputing, as you may
well imagine, such good fortune being beyond the utmost hopes of him
and his daughter,—the one to be father-in-law of the King of France,
the other to be Queen of that Realm. Of this Princess I do propose to
speak elsewhere.


                                  2.

To return once more to our little Queen. Wearied of a longer tarrying
in France for sundry reasons, and in especial because she was not
properly respected and appreciated there as she did deserve to be,
she did resolve to go finish out the remainder of her virtuous days
with the Emperor, her father, and the Empress, her mother. During her
residence at their Court, the Catholic King was widowed of his Queen,
Anne of Austria, own sister of the said French Queen Elisabeth. The
latter he would fain have married and did send to beg the Empress, who
was sister of the said Catholic King, to open the first proposals to
that effect. But she would never hearken, once, twice or three times
that her mother spake to her of the matter, appealing to the ashes of
the late King, her husband, the which she declared she would never
insult by a second marriage, and likewise alleging the over close
consanguinity and near relationship which was betwixt the two, whereby
the marriage might well anger God sorely. Whereupon the Empress and
the King her brother did bethink them to have a Jesuit Father, a very
learned and very eloquent man, speak with her, who did exhort and
sermonize her all ever he could, not forgetting to quote all the most
telling passages of Holy Scripture of every sort that might advance his
object. But the Queen did straight confound him with other as good and
more appropriate quotations, for since her widowhood she had applied
her earnestly to the study of God’s Word, alleging moreover her fixed
determination, which was her chiefest bulwark, never to forget her
husband in a second marriage. The end was the Jesuit came back with
naught accomplished. However, being strongly urged there by letters
from the King of Spain, he did return once again to the attack, not
content with the firm answer he had already had of the said Princess.
The latter, unwilling to waste more time in vain contest with him,
did treat him to some strong words and actual menaces, cutting him
short with the warning that if he would persist in deafening her any
more with the matter, she would make him repent his interference, even
threatening she would have him whipped in her kitchen. I have further
heard tell,—I know not with how much truth,—that, the man having
attacked her for the third time, she went beyond threats, and had him
chastised for his insolence. But this I do not believe, seeing she did
too well love folk of holy life, such as these men be.

Such was the constancy and noble firmness of this virtuous Queen,—a
constancy she did keep unbroken to the end of her days, ever honouring
the sacred ashes of her husband.[98*] Faithfully did she water these
with her mournful tears, whose fountain at the last drying up, she did
succumb to her sorrow and die very young. She could not have been more
than five and thirty at her decease,—truly a quite inestimable loss,
for she might long have been a mirror of virtue to all honourable
ladies throughout Christendom.

And verily, showing as she did the love she bare the King, her husband,
by her constancy, virtuous continence and unceasing plaints, she did
manifest the same even more finely toward the Queen of Navarre, her
sister-in-law. For knowing her to be in great extremity of distress,
and reduced to live in a remote Castle of Auvergne,[99*] all but
deserted of all her friends and followers and by the most part of
those she had erstwhile obliged, she did send to greet her and offer
her every assistance. In fact she did presently give her one-half of
all her jointure which she did enjoy in France, sharing with her as
if she had been her own proper sister. They say indeed this high-born
Queen would have had no little hardship to endure but for this great
liberality of her good and gentle kinswoman. Accordingly she did pay
her great respect, loving and honouring her so well she had all the
difficulty in the world to bear her death with proper patience. Indeed,
for twenty days running she did keep her bed, weeping and crying and
making continual moan; and ever after did naught but regret and deplore
her loss, devoting to her memory the noblest words, such that there
could be no need to borrow better to praise her withal and keep her
remembrance immortally green. I have been told further that Queen
Elisabeth too did compose and indite a work of such beauty it cometh
near God’s own word, as also one containing the history of all that
did hap in France while she was in that country. I know not if this be
true, but I have been assured the book was seen in the hands of the
Queen of Navarre, as though it had been sent her as a last present
before the other’s death. ’Twas most highly thought on of her, and
pronounced a most admirable production. At the word of so noble and
divine an oracle, what can we do but believe ’twas verily so?

Such then is the summary account I have been able to give of our good
Queen Elisabeth, of her kindness, virtue, constancy and faithfulness,
and her true and loyal love toward the King, her husband. And ’twas but
her nature to be so good and virtuous (I have heard M. de Lansac,[100*]
who was in Spain when she died, tell how the Empress said to him on
that occasion, _El mejor de nosotros es muerto_,—“The best of us all
is dead”), and we may well believe how in such actions this Queen was
but for imitating her own mother, her great aunts and aunts. For the
Empress, her mother, albeit she was left a widow when still quite young
and very handsome, would never marry again, but did ever after continue
in her widowhood, right wisely and steadfastly, having quitted Austria
and Germany, the scene of her rule, after the death of the Emperor, her
husband. She went to join her brother in Spain, having been summoned
of him and besought to go thither to help him in the heavy burden
of his affairs. This she did, for indeed she was a very prudent and
well-counselled Princess. I have heard the late King Henri III., who
was more skilled in reading character than any other man in all his
Kingdom, declare she was in his opinion one of the most honourable,
wise and accomplished Princesses in the world.

On this, her journey to Spain, after passing through the divers States
of Germany, she did presently arrive at Genoa in Italy, where she
embarked. But seeing ’twas in winter, in the month of December, that
she took ship, a storm did overtake her at Marseilles, at which port
she was forced to cast anchor in the roads. Yet would she never come
within the harbour, she or her galleys, for fear of giving any ground
for umbrage or suspicion; nor did herself enter the town but only once,
to see the sights. Off this port she did tarry seven or eight days,
a-waiting for fair weather. Her most favourite course was every morning
to leave her galley (for she did usually sleep a-board), and so during
the day to go hear the service of mass at the Church of St. Victor
with very devout attention. Then presently, her dinner having been
brought and made ready in the Abbey, she would there dine; after which
she would indulge in discourse with her ladies, or her folk generally,
or else with divers gentlemen of Marseilles, which did show her all
the honour and respect due to so noble a Princess, the King of France
indeed having bid them specially to receive her as it were his own
kingly person in recompense for the good welcome and excellent cheer
she had given him at Vienna. This she did readily enough perceive;
and for that reason would converse very intimately with them and
show herself exceeding condescending, treating them more after the
German and French fashion than the Spanish. In fact they were no less
delighted with her than she with them, and did write a most courteous
letter to the King, thanking him and informing him they were as worthy
and honourable folk as ever she had seen in any place. Moreover she did
make separate mention by name of some score or so of them, among whom
was M. Castellan, known as the Seigneur Altyvity, Captain of the King’s
Galleys, a man much renowned for having wedded the fair Chasteauneuf,
a Court lady, and for having killed the Grand Prior, himself falling
along with him, as I do hope to relate in another place. It was none
other than his wife which did relate to me what I here set down, and
did tell me of all the perfections of this noble Princess, and how
pleasant she did find her enforced stay at Marseilles, and how she
admired and enjoyed the place in her walks abroad. But evening once
come, she did never fail to return to sleep on board her galley, to
the end, the moment fine weather and a favourable wind should come,
she might straight make sail, or mayhap because she was anxious to
give no cause of umbrage. I was at Court at the time these facts were
reported to the King concerning her passing visit, who was most anxious
to know if she had been well received, and how she was, and did wish
her well in all respects. The said Princess is yet alive, and doth
continue in her good and virtuous behaviour, having done her brother
excellent service, by all I am told. She did later retire for her
final abode and dwelling-place to a Convent of religious women, called
the _descalçadas_ (unshod), because they do wear neither shoes nor
stockings. This house was founded by her sister, the Princess of Spain.

This same Princess of Spain was a very beautiful lady in her day, and
of a most courtly dignity.[101*] Else truly she would not have been a
Spanish Princess; for of a surety, fine bearing and becoming grace do
ever go along with Royalty, and above all with Spanish Royalty. Myself
have had the honour of seeing her and speaking with her on terms of
some intimacy, whenas I was in Spain after my return from Portugal.
The first time I went to pay my duty to our Queen Elisabeth of France,
and was discoursing with her, answering her many questions as to the
news from France and Portugal, they came to inform the Queen that the
Princess of Spain was coming in. Instantly she said to me: “Nay! do
not retire, Monsieur de Bourdeille; you will see a very fair and noble
Princess, and will find pleasure in so doing. She will be very glad
to see you and to ask you news of the King, her son, as you have just
lately seen him.” Hereupon cometh the Princess herself, whom I thought
exceeding handsome, and in my opinion very becomingly attired, on her
head a Spanish cap of white crêpe, coming low down in a point over the
face, but not otherwise in widow’s weeds, according to the Spanish
fashion, for indeed her almost constant wear was silk. At first I did
gaze long at her and admire her beauty, till just as I was growing
quite enthralled, the Queen did call me up, and told me the Princess
was fain to hear news of me concerning the King her son; for I had
already overheard the Queen informing her how she had but now been
conversing with a gentleman of the King’s, late come from Portugal.
At this, I came forward, and did kiss her gown in the Spanish mode,
whereupon she did greet me very graciously and familiarly, and began
asking me news of the King, her son, his behaviour, and what I thought
of him. For at the time a proposed match was being talked of betwixt
him and the noble Princess Marguerite of France, the King’s sister and
now Queen of Navarre. I did give her abundance of information; for in
those days I did speak Spanish as well as my native French, or even
better. Among other questions, she did ask me, “Was her son handsome,
and who was he most like?” I told her he was one of the handsomest
Princes in Christendom, as truly he was, and that he was like her in
every way, and the living image of her beauty, whereat she gave a
little smile and blush, plainly showing her pleasure at what I had said.

After we had conversed a long while together, the Queen’s attendants
came to summon her to supper, and so the two sisters separated. Then
did the Queen say to me (she had been amusing herself at the window,
yet had heard most of what we said), with a laugh: “You did please her
mightily by what you said as to the likeness betwixt her son and her.”
Presently she asked what I thought of her, and if I did not think her
a noble lady, and such as she had described her, and anon remarked:
“I imagine she would be right glad to wed the King, my brother, and I
should dearly love it.” All this I did duly report later to the Queen
Mother, when I was returned back to the French Court, which was at the
time at Arles in Provence. But she did declare the Princess was too old
for him, old enough to be his mother. I informed her moreover of what I
had been told in Spain, and did consider of good authority, to wit that
she was firm resolved never to marry again, an it were not to wed the
King of France, or failing this to withdraw from the world altogether.

And truly she did grow so enamoured of this high match and fair
prospect, for she was of high heart and ambition, and she did firmly
believe she was approaching its accomplishment, or failing this, was
resolved to end her days in the convent I have spoken of, where already
she was having buildings constructed against her possible retirement
from the world. Accordingly she did long cling to this hope and belief,
ever wisely maintaining her widowhood, till she did learn of the King’s
marriage with her niece. Then, all her hopes frustrated, she did
pronounce these words expressive of despite or something like it, as
I have been told: _Aunque la nieta sea por su verano mas moza, y menos
cargada de años que la tia, la hermosura de la tia, ya en su estio toda
hecha y formada por sus gentiles y fructiferos años, vale mas que todos
los frutos que su edad florescida da esperanza à venir; porque la menor
desdicha humana los harà caer y perder ni mas ni menos que alguinos
arboles, los quales, en el verano, por sus lindas y blancos flores
nos prometen linda fruta en el estio, y el menor viento que acade los
lleva y abate, no quedando que las hojas. Ea! dunque pasase todo con
la voluntad de Dios, con el qual desde agora me voy, no con otro, para
siempre jamas, me casar_,—“True the niece is younger and in her first
prime, and less advanced in years than the aunt, yet is the beauty of
the latter, already in its summer glory, fully grown and formed by the
gracious years, and bearing fruit, better worth than all the fruits
that the other’s age, now but beginning to bloom, doth give expectation
of. For the smallest human accident will destroy the same, withering
and ruining them, just like trees in the springtime, which by their
fair white blossoms do promise us fair and excellent fruits in summer.
But let only a little blast of wind arise, and lo! they be broken off
and beaten down and spoiled, and naught left but only leaves. Well!
God’s will be done, with whom I am about to wed for all eternity, and
with no human bridegroom at all.” So said, so done; and thereafter she
did lead a life so good and holy, altogether removed from the wicked
world, as that she hath left behind to all ladies, great and small, a
noble example for their imitation.

Some folks might possibly say, “Well! God be thanked she could not
marry King Charles; for be sure, and if this could have been brought
about, she would have sent far enough the hard life of a widow, and
been right glad to take up again the soft and pleasant one of a wife.”
This may well be allowed; but this likewise it must be granted on the
other hand, that the great wish she did display to wed this puissant
Monarch was but a manifestation of her proud and ambitious Spanish
heart, for to show her high spirit, and prove she would in no wise take
a lowly place; but seeing her sister an Empress, not able to be one
too, yet fain to rival her, she did therefore aspire to be Queen of the
realm of France, which is as good as any Empire, or better, and, if not
in actual fact, yet in will and desire to be on an equal footing with
her. Such motives do well accord with her character, as I have heard
it described. To make an end, she was in mine opinion one of the most
noble and high-bred foreign Princesses I have ever seen, albeit she may
perhaps be reproached with her retirement from the world, due rather
to despite than to genuine devotion. Yet she did thus piously withdraw
her; and her good life and holy have sufficiently made manifest the
true sanctity of her character.


                                  3.

Her aunt, Queen Mary of Hungary, did the like, but at a very advanced
age, and this no less from her own desire to retire from the world
than in order to help her brother the Emperor to serve God well and
piously. This same Queen was widowed at a very early age, having lost
King Louis, her husband, which fell very young in a battle he fought
with the Turks,—a battle he should never of rights have lost, but for
the obstinacy of a Cardinal, which had much influence over him and did
over-persuade him against his better judgement, declaring ’twas not
meet to distrust God’s power and a righteous cause. Though he should
have but ten thousand Hungarians, more or less, on his side, yet these
being all good Christians and fighting in God’s quarrel, he should
easily rout ten thousand Turks. In fine he did so incite and push
him to recklessness, as that he did lose the battle; and presently
attempting to retreat was entangled in a marsh and there choked.

The same fate befell the last King of Portugal, Don Sebastian,[102*]
which did perish miserably, having risked battle with too weak a force
against the Moors, that were three times as strong as himself. This was
done through the advice, preaching and obstinacy of sundry Jesuits,
which were forever alleging the power of Almighty God, who with a look
could strike a whole host dead, above all when this was banded together
against him. An excellent and a true doctrine doubtless; yet must we
not be over confident and abuse God’s promises, for His secret purpose
will alway be past our finding out. Some say the Jesuit Fathers gave
the counsel they did in all good faith, as is quite credible; others
that they were traitors and had been gained over by the King of Spain,
to the end they might so bring about the undoing of the young and
gallant King of Portugal, courageous and fiery as he was, and himself
be the better able to lay his hands on that he did after seize. Be this
as it may, ’tis certain both these disasters befell through these folk,
which be fain to manage armies, yet have never learned the trade of war.

And this is why the great Duc de Guise, after he had been sore deceived
in his Italian expedition, was often used to say, “I do love God’s
Church, yet will I never undertake a conquest on the word and faith
of any Priest.” By this he was for chiding the Pope, Caraffa, known
as Paul IV., which had not kept his promises made to him in the most
impressive and solemn words, or mayhap the Cardinal, his brother, who
had gone all the way to Rome to discuss the matter and see how the land
lay, after which he did recklessly urge his brother to the enterprise.
It may well be the aforesaid Duc de Guise had in his mind both Pope
and Cardinal; for undoubtedly, as I have been informed, whenever the
Duke did repeat this saying, as oft he did, before his brother, the
latter deeming it a stone pitched into his garden, would be secretly
much enraged and furiously angry. This is a digression, but my subject
seemed to warrant it.

To return now to our good Queen Mary of Hungary. After this disaster
to her husband, she was left a very young and beautiful widow, as I
have heard many persons say which have seen her, as also according to
the portraits of her I have seen, which do all represent her as very
fair, giving her never an ugly or censurable feature, except only her
heavy, projecting mouth, or “Austrian lip.”[103*] However this doth
not really come from the House of Austria, but from that of Burgundy,
as I have heard a lady of the Court at that time relate. She said how
once when Queen Eleanor was passing by way of Dijon on her way to pay
her devotions at the Monastery of the Chartreuse in that region, and to
visit the reverend sepulchres of her ancestors, the Dukes of Burgundy,
she was curious to have these opened, as many monarchs have done with
theirs. Some of the bodies she did find so whole and well preserved she
did recognise many of their features, and amongst others the mouth.
Whereupon she did suddenly cry: “Ah! I thought we did take our mouths
from them of Austria; but by what I see here, we seem rather to get
them from Mary of Burgundy, our ancestress, and the Dukes of Burgundy,
our ancestors. If ever I see the Emperor, my brother, I will tell him;
nay! I will write him at once.” The lady which was then present told
me she did herself hear these words, declaring further the Queen did
pronounce them as if pleased at her discovery. And in this she was very
right, for truly the House of Burgundy was every whit as good as that
of Austria, springing as it did from a son of France, Philip le Hardi,
from whom they had inherited much wealth and courage and high spirit.
Indeed I imagine there were never four greater Dukes, one after the
other, than were these four Dukes of Burgundy. Truly I may be charged
with everlastingly wandering from my subject; but ’tis an easy matter
to excuse me, I think, seeing I have never been taught the art of
careful and correct writing.

Our Queen Mary of Hungary then was a most fair and agreeable Princess,
and a very amiable, albeit she did show herself somewhat over
masculine. But for that she was none the worse for love, nor yet for
war, which she did take for her chiefest exercise. The Emperor, her
brother, seeing her meet for this work and very apt therein, did send
to summon her and beg her to come to him, for to give her the charge
of her aunt Marguerite of Flanders had held, which was a very wise
Princess and one that did govern his Province of the Low Countries with
as much gentleness as the other had used severity. Wherefore so long as
she lived, King Francis did never direct his arms toward that quarter,
saying he would fain avoid giving displeasure to so noble a Princess,
which did show her so well disposed to France, and so wise and virtuous
to boot. Unhappy too beyond her deserts in her marriages, whereof the
first was with King Charles VIII., by whom she was while still quite
a girl sent back to her father’s house; the second with the King of
Aragon’s son, John by name, of whom she had a posthumous son that died
soon after its birth. The third was with the handsome Duke Philibert of
Savoy, of whom she had no offspring, and for that cause did bear the
device, _Fortune infortune, fors une_. She doth lie with her husband
in the beautiful and most splendid Cloister of Brou, near the town of
Bourg en Bresse, a Church I have myself visited.

This same Queen of Hungary then did greatly help the Emperor, seeing
how isolated he was. ’Twas true he had Ferdinand, King of the Romans,
his brother; yet was it all he could do to make head against that great
conqueror, the Sultan Soliman. The Emperor had moreover on his hands
the affairs of Italy, which was at that time all a-fire; while Germany
was little better by reason of the Grand Turk, and he was harassed
to boot with Hungary, Spain at the time of its rebellion under M. de
Chièvres, the Indies, the Low Countries, Barbary, and France, which
last was the most sore burden of all, in a word with the business of
nigh half the world, in a manner of speaking.[104*] He did make his
sister Governess General of all the Netherlands, where by the space
of two or three and twenty years she did him such excellent service
I really cannot tell what he would have done without her. So he did
entrust her with entire charge of the government of those districts,
and even when himself was in Flanders, did leave all the management of
his provinces in that quarter in her hands. The council was held under
her direction and in her apartments even when the Emperor was present
and did attend, as I have been told he often did. ’Tis true she was
very able and did manage it all for him, reporting to him all that had
taken place at the meeting when he was not there, in all which he did
find the utmost pleasure. She did carry out some very successful wars
too, whether by her generals or in person, always riding a-horse, like
a noble-hearted Amazon-queen.

She it was which did first begin those burnings of strongholds in our
land of France, destroying thus some of the finest houses and castles,
and in especial that of Folembray,[105*] a beautiful and agreeable
residence our Kings had built them for the delight and pleasure of the
chase. At this the King did feel so sore despite and displeasure as
that no long while after she did get of him as good as she gave, for
he took his revenge on her noble house of Bains, the which was held
for one of the marvels of the world, shaming so to speak all other
beautiful buildings of the earth, and I have heard those say that had
seen it in its perfection, comparable even to the seven wonders of the
world, so renowned in Antiquity. ’Twas there she did entertain the
Emperor Charles and all his Court, the time when his son, King Philip,
came from Spain to Flanders for to visit his father, such excellence
and perfection of magnificence being then displayed that naught else
was spoke of at the time save only _las fiestas de Bains_, as the
Spaniards said. Moreover I do remember on the journey to Bayonne, when
some very splendid shows were given, tilting at the ring, combats,
masquerades and games, ’twas all naught to be compared with these
famous _fiestas de Bains_,—as sundry old Spanish noblemen which had
witnessed them did declare, and as I have seen myself in a Work writ
in Spanish on purpose to celebrate them. And it may be certainly said
there hath never aught been done or seen finer, equalling even the
splendours of Roman days, and copying their old-time sports, always
excepting the fights of Gladiators and wild beasts. But with this only
exception, the feasts of Bains were finer, more agreeable, as well as
more varied and general.

These fêtes I would most dearly love to describe here, according to
the particulars I have gleaned from this Spanish work, as well as
learned from sundry eye-witnesses, and in especial from Madame de
Fontaine, surnamed Torcy,[106*] acting as sister for the time being to
Queen Eleanor; but I should be blamed as too continually digressing
from my subject. So I must e’en keep it for a tid-bit some other
time, the matter really meriting full description. Amongst the most
splendid of the shows, I will name but this. She had a great fortress
of brick, which was assaulted, defended, and relieved by a body of six
thousand foot-men of veteran regiments, bombarded by thirty pieces of
ordnance, whether in the trenches or on the walls, with all identical
methods and ceremonies as in actual war. The siege did last three days
and an half, and so fine a sight was never seen; for assaults were
delivered, relief brought up, the besieged beaten back, both cavalry
and infantry participating in the manœuvres, under charge of the Prince
of Piedmont, the place being eventually surrendered on terms, in part
favourable, in part rather hard, the garrison being granted their lives
and withdrawing under escort. In a word no detail of real war was
forgot,—all to the singular gratification of the Emperor.

Rest assured, if the Queen was lavish on that occasion, ’twas but
to show her brother that what he had had of him, estates, pensions,
benefits, share of his conquests, all was vowed to the further
heightening of his glory and pleasure. Wherefore the said Emperor
was greatly pleased and did highly commend and approve the great
expenditure, and especially that lavished on his own chamber. This was
hung with tapestry of a raised warp, all of gold, silver and silk,
where were figured and represented in their true colours all the famous
conquests, high emprises, warlike expeditions and battles, he had ever
made and won, above all not forgetting the defeat of Soliman before
Vienna, and the taking prisoner of King Francis I. In fact there was
naught therein that was not of the best and most highly wrought.

But truly the unfortunate mansion did lose all its splendour later,
forasmuch as it was utterly devastated, pillaged, ruined and
overthrown. I have heard say how its mistress, on learning this ruin,
did fall in such distress, despite and fury, that ’twas many days ere
she could be appeased. Subsequently, when one day passing near the
spot, she was fain to see the remains, and gazing very sadly at these,
did swear, the tears in her eyes, that all France should repent the
deed and be right sorry for these conflagrations, and that she would
never be content till yonder proud Castle of Fontainebleau, whereof
folk did make so much, was levelled with the earth and not one stone
left on another. And in very deed she did spew out her anger right
fiercely over the unhappy land of Picardy, which felt the sore effects
of her wrath and the fires she kindled there; and I ween, if truce had
not interfered, her vengeance would have been startling. For she was
of a proud and hard heart, and slow to be appeased, and was generally
held, of her own people as well as ours, somewhat over cruel; but such
is ever the bent of women, especially of high-born women, which be very
ready to take vengeance for any offence done them. The Emperor, by all
they say, did only love her the more for this.

I have heard tell how, when the Emperor did abdicate at Brussels and
strip him of his power, the ceremony being held in a great Hall wherein
he had called together an assembly of his Estates, after he had made a
set speech and said all he wished to his son, and had likewise humbly
thanked his sister, Queen Mary, which was seated by the side of the
Emperor her brother, the latter presently rising from her seat, and
with a deep reverence to her brother, did address the people with a
grave and dignified port and much confidence and grace, and said as
follows: “Gentlemen, for these three and twenty years past that my
brother, the Emperor, hath been pleased to grant me the charge and
government of these Low Countries, I have ever employed in the said
task all the means and abilities that God, Nature and Fortune have
bestowed on me, for to perform the same to the utmost of my powers. But
an if in aught I have made failure, I am surely to be excused, for I
think I have never forgot my duty nor spared the proper pains. Yet, and
if I _have_ lacked in anything, I do beg you to forgive me. However,
if there be any one of you will not so do, but is ill content with
me and my government, why! ’tis the smallest of my cares, seeing the
Emperor, my brother, is well content, and to please him, and him alone,
hath ever been the chiefest of my desires and cares.” With these words
and another deep reverence to the Emperor, she did resume her seat. I
have heard some say this speech was found of many somewhat over proud
and haughty, more especially on occasion her giving up her charge and
bidding farewell to a people she was about to leave. ’Twould surely
have been more natural, had she desired to leave a good savour in their
mouth and some grief behind her on her departure. But for all this she
had never a thought, seeing her sole end was to please and content her
brother, and from henceforth to take no heed of the world but keep her
brother company in his retirement and life of prayer.

This account I had of a gentleman of my brother’s suite, which was
at the time at Brussels, whither he had gone to treat of the ransom
of my brother aforesaid, he having been taken prisoner in Hedin, and
having spent five years in confinement at Lille in Flanders. The said
gentleman was present throughout this assembly and mournful abdication
of the Emperor; and did tell me how not a few persons were something
scandalized in secret at this haughty pronouncement of the Queen’s, yet
did never dare say a word or let their opinion appear, seeing plainly
they had to do with a masterful dame, which, if angered, would surely
before her final departure have done something startling for a last
stroke.

Presently freed of all her charge and responsibility, she doth
accompany her brother to Spain; which land she did never after quit,
either she or her sister Queen Eleanor, till the day of death. Of the
three, each did survive the other by one year; the Emperor died first,
the Queen of France next, being the eldest, then the Queen of Hungary
after the two others, her brother and sister. Both sisters did behave
them wisely and well in widowhood; the Queen of Hungary was a longer
time widow than her sister, and did never marry again, while her sister
did so twice, partly to be Queen of France, a dainty morsel, partly by
the prayers and persuasion of the Emperor, to the end she might be a
sure pledge of peace and public quietness. Not that the said pledge did
avail for long while, for War brake out again presently, as cruel as
ever. However this was no fault of the poor Princess, who did all she
could. Yet for all that did King Francis, her husband, treat her but
scurvily, hating and abominating the connection, as I have been told.


                                  4.

After the departure of the Queen of Hungary there was left no great
Princess with King Philip (now Sovereign Lord invested with his domains
in the Netherlands and elsewhere), but only the Duchesse de Lorraine,
Christina of Denmark,[107*] his cousin german, later entitled Her
Highness, which did always hold him good company, so long as he tarried
in these parts. She did add much to the brilliance of his Court, for
truly no Court, whether of King, Prince, Emperor or Monarch, no matter
how magnificent it be, is of much account, if it be not accompanied
and seconded by a Queen’s or Empress’s Court, or at least a great
Princess’s, and thereat a good abundance of noble dames and damsels,
as both myself have observed and have heard pronouncement to the same
effect in the highest quarters.

This said Princess was in mine opinion one of the most beauteous and
most well accomplished Princesses I have ever seen,—in face very
fair and pleasing, her figure very tall and fine, her conversation
agreeable, and above all her dress most excellent. In fact all her life
she was the pattern and model of fashion to all the ladies of France.
This mode of dressing head and hair and arranging the veil was known
as the Lorraine way, and ’twas a pretty sight to see our Court ladies
so attired. These were ever a-making grand fêtes and splendid shows,
the better thereat to show off their dainty adornments, all being _à
la Lorraine_ and copied after Her Highness. In especial she had one
of the prettiest hands ever seen; and I have heard the Queen Mother
herself praise the same, and liken it to her own for perfection. She
had an excellent seat on horseback, and rode with no little grace,
always using the stirrup attached to the saddle, the mode whereof she
had learned of the Queen Marie, her aunt, and the Queen Mother, so I
have heard say of her; for previously she had ridden with help of the
old-fashioned “planchette,”[108] which was far from properly showing
off her grace and her elegant seat like the stirrup. In all this she
was for imitating the Queen her aunt, never mounting any but Spanish
horses, Turks, Barbs and the very best jennets, which could go well
at the amble. Of such I have seen a dozen capital mounts at one time
in her stable, all so excellent, ’twere impossible to say one was
better than another. The said aunt did love her dearly, as well for the
exercises they both were fond of, hunting, riding and the like, as for
her virtues, the which she did observe in her. Accordingly, after her
marriage, she did often go to visit her in Flanders, as I have heard
Madame de Fontaines relate; and indeed after she became a widow, and
especially after her son had been taken from her, she did quit Lorraine
altogether in despite, so proud and high of heart was she. She did
thereafter take up her abode with the Emperor her uncle and the Queens
her aunts, all which great personages did receive her with no small
pleasure.

She did bear exceeding hardly the loss and absence of her son, and
this in spite of all possible excuses which King Henri did make her,
and his declared intention of adopting him as his son. But presently,
finding no assuagement, and seeing how they were giving him one M.
de La Brousse as tutor, instead of the one he now had, namely M. de
Montbardon, a very wise and honourable gentleman the Emperor himself
had assigned to that office, having long known him for a worthy man,
for he had been in the service of M. de Bourbon, and was a French
refugee, the Princess, thinking all desperate, did seek out King Henri
one Holy Thursday in the great Gallery at Nancy, where all his Court
was assembled. Thus, with an assured grace and that great beauty which
did make her yet more admirable, she did advance, with no undue awe or
any sort of abasement at his grandeur, albeit bowing low in reverence
before him; and in suppliant wise, with tears in her eyes, the which
did but make her more fair and more delightsome to look upon, did
remonstrate with the King as to the wrong he was doing her in taking
away her son,—the dearest possession she had in all the world. Little
did she deserve, she added, so harsh treatment, seeing the high station
she was born in and the fact she had never dreamed of doing aught to
his disservice. All this she said so well and with so excellent a
grace, with reasoning so cogent and complaint so pitiful, as that the
King, always very courteous toward ladies, was deeply stirred with
compassion,—and not he alone, but all the Lords and Princes, great and
small, which were present at the sight.

The King, who was the most respectful monarch toward ladies hath ever
been in France, did answer her in very honourable terms, albeit with
no rigmarole of words nor by way of set harangue, as Paradin doth
represent the matter in his _History of France_; for indeed of his
nature this monarch was not so prolix, nor copious in reasons and fine
speeches, nor a mighty orator. Neither had he any need to be, nor is
it becoming that a King should play the philosopher and rhetorician,
the shortest replies and briefest questions being more meet for him and
more becoming. This I have heard argued by not a few great men, amongst
others by M. de Pibrac,[109*] whose judgment was much to be relied on
by reason of the competence of knowledge he did possess. Moreover any
one that shall read the speech as given by Paradin, as supposed by him
to have been delivered in this place by King Henri, will credit never
a word of it; besides which, I have heard positively from a number
of great folk which were there present that he did not make any such
lengthy harangue as the historian saith.

’Tis quite true at the same time that he did condole with her in very
honourable and proper phrase on her alleged grievance, saying she had
no real reason to be troubled thereat, for that ’twas to assure the
lad’s estate, and not out of any selfish hostility toward him, he was
fain to have her son by his side, and to keep him along with his own
son and heir, to share his bringing up and fashion of life and fortune.
Further that himself being French, and the boy of French extraction,
he could scarce be better off than to be reared at the French Court
and among French folk, where he had so many kinsmen and friends.
In especial he forgat not to add how the house of Lorraine did lie
under greater obligation to that of France than to any other in all
Christendom, alleging the countenance given by France to the Duke of
Lorraine as against Duke Charles of Burgundy, that was slain before
Nancy. For that ’twas an undoubted truth to say that but for that
Country’s help, the said Duke would have utterly undone the Duke of
Lorraine and his Duchy to boot, and made him the most unhappy Prince
in the world. He did further allege the gratitude they of the House
of Lorraine did owe to the French, for the great assistance rendered
them by the latter in their successes in the Holy Wars and conquests of
Jerusalem, and the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily. Further he did declare
how neither his natural bent nor true interests were like to set him on
ruining and undoing Princes, but rather to help the same in all ways,
when in danger and difficulty,—as he had actually done to the little
Queen of Scots, a near kinswoman of his son, to the Duke of Parma, as
well as to Germany, that was so sore pressed it was nigh coming to
utter ruin without such help. The same kindness and generosity, he
said, was his motive for taking the young Prince of Lorraine under his
protection, for to bring him up to an higher estate than else he could
aspire to, and make him his son by marrying him eventually to one of
his own daughters; in fine that she had no sort of call to be afflicted
at his action.

Yet could not all these fine words and excellent reasons in any wise
calm her grief, neither enable her to bear her loss one whit more
patiently. So presently with another deep reverence, and still shedding
many pathetic tears, she did withdraw her to her own chamber, the King
himself conducting her to the door thereof. Next day, before quitting
the place, he did visit her in her chamber to bid her farewell, but
without her winning any concession as to her petition. Accordingly
having thus seen her beloved son torn from her and carried away to
France, she did resolve for her part to leave Lorraine altogether and
retire to Flanders to the side of her uncle the Emperor (oh! the fine
sound of that word) and to the company of her cousin King Philip and
the Queens her aunts—a noble alliance and a great! This she did; and
did never leave Flanders more, till after conclusion of the peace
betwixt the two Kings, when he of Spain took ship and sailed away for
that country.

To the making of the said peace she did no little avail, my! rather was
the chiefest contributor thereto. For the delegates of the one side and
the other, by what I have heard said, after having laboured and sweated
all in vain at Cercan for several days, without arranging or settling
aught, were still at fault and off the scent, as we say in hunting,
when she, whether inspired by wisdom from on high or urged thereto
by Christian zeal and her own kind heart, did take up the chase, and
carry this important negotiation to a good end and one so fortunate to
all Christian peoples. And of a truth ’twas said no other could have
been found so meet to move and set in place this great corner stone,
seeing she was a lady of skill and experience if ever there was one,
as well as of high and weighty authority,—and there can be never a
doubt but petty, low-born folk are not so apt for the like business
as great personages be. For this and many other reasons the King her
cousin did feel much trust and confidence in her, well knowing her
good qualities. He did ever love her well, bearing her much affection
and esteem; and indeed she did help him much and contribute greatly
to the splendour and renown of his Court, the which without her would
have sorely lacked brilliancy. Yet afterward, I have been told, he did
show her but poor gratitude and treated her scurvily with regard to her
lands which did fall to her for jointure in the Duchy of Milan, where
she had been married in first wedlock with the Duke Sforza; for by
what I have been informed, he did rob her and bring her short of some
portion of these.

I have heard it said that after the loss of her son, she did remain
very ill content with the Duc de Guise and the great Cardinal her
brother, holding them to blame for having advised the King to that
course, by reason of their ambition, both because they were fain to
see their near cousin adopted as son and married within the House of
France, and because she had some while before refused M. de Guise in
marriage, which had sent to her to make such offer. She being one of
the proudest of womankind, made answer she would never wed the younger
son of the house whereof she had been wife of the eldest. For this
rebuff the Duke did ever after bear her a grudge, and this although he
did lose naught in his subsequent marriage, his wife being of a most
illustrious house and granddaughter of a King, Louis XII., one of the
best and bravest monarchs have ever sat on the French throne,—and what
is more, being one of the most beautiful women in Christendom.

Hereanent I have heard tell how the first time these two beauteous
Princesses met, both were so curious to mark one the other, whether
directing their gaze straight in the face, or askance or sideways,
as that neither could look long enough, so set were they and eager
to examine each other’s charms. I leave you to fancy all the divers
thoughts must have traversed these fair ladies’ minds. Just so we do
read how a little before the great battle was fought in Africa betwixt
Scipio and Hannibal, which did put a final end to the War of Rome and
Carthage, how previous to its beginning, they did come together in a
short truce of some two hours’ duration. Whenas they were approached
near each other, there the twain of them stood some little while
wrapped in contemplation one of the other, each thinking of the valour
of the other, so renowned by their exploits and so well represented
in their gallant visages, their persons, and their fine, warlike ways
and bearing. Then after so tarrying entranced in these noble dreams
the one of the other, they did presently set them to negotiation after
the fashion Livy hath so well described. Thus valour doth make itself
esteemed in the midst of enmity and hate, as doth beauty in the midst
of mutual jealousy,—as proven in the case of the two fair Princesses I
have spoke of.

Truly the beauty and charming grace of these twain might well be
pronounced equal, only that Madame de Guise mayhap did in some ways
bear the bell. But she was well content to surpass her rival in these
qualities only, never a whit in pride and high bearing; for indeed she
was the most gentle, good, condescending and affable Princess ever
known, albeit she could show herself at need high-spirited and gallant.
Nature had framed her so, no less by reason of her tall and noble
figure than of her dignified port and stately carriage, so that to look
at her a man might well fear and think twice about addressing her in
speech, yet having plucked up courage so to accost her, naught would he
find in her but all sweetness, candour and good-nature,—these pleasant
qualities being inherited from her grandfather, the good father of his
people, and the kindly French habit. ’Tis true enough however she knew
very well how to keep her dignity and show her pride, when need was. I
do hope to further speak of her specially in another place.

Her Highness of Lorraine on the contrary was exceeding proud and
somewhat overweening. This myself did note on sundry occasions in her
bearing toward the Queen of Scots, who after she was a widow, did make
a journey to Lorraine, where I then was. Not seldom you would have
thought the aforesaid proud Princess was eager to take advantage and
encroach somewhat upon the unhappy Queen’s majesty. Yet the latter,
who was a woman of the world and of a high spirit, did never give her
occasion to glory over her or in any wise encroach on her dignity,
albeit her bearing was always gentleness itself. Indeed the Cardinal
her brother had duly warned her and given her an inkling of the haughty
humour of the said Princess.

Never could this latter entirely rid her of her pride, yet was she
fain to modify the same somewhat toward the Queen Mother (Catherine
de Medici), when they met. Verily ’twas pride against pride; for the
Queen Mother was the very proudest woman in all the world, when need
was, as I have myself seen, and heard the same character given her of
many great personages,—and above all if it were necessary to lower
the pride of some presumptuous person, for she would ever contrive to
abase such to the very bowels of the earth. Yet did she always bear
herself courteously toward her Highness, treating her with sufficient
deference and respect, yet ever keeping a tight rein, hand high or
hand low as occasion did demand, for fear she should mayhap forget
herself and presume on some liberty; and myself did hear her twice or
thrice declare, “Yonder is the proudest woman I ever saw!” This was at
the time she came to the coronation of our late King Charles IX. at
Reims, whither she was invited. On her entry into that city, she would
not ride a-horseback, fearing thereby to derogate something of her
dignity and rank, but did arrive in a coach magnificently furnished,
all covered with black velvet, by reason of her widowhood, and drawn
by four white barbs, the finest could anywhere be chosen, harnessed
four abreast, as it had been a triumphal chariot. Herself was at the
carriage door, splendidly attired, though all in black, in a velvet
robe, but her head dress all of white, magnificently arranged and
set off. At the other door was one of her daughters, which was after
Duchess of Bavaria;[110*] and within, her maid of honour, the Princess
of Macedonia. The Queen Mother, desiring to see her enter the outer
court in this triumphant guise, did set her at a window, exclaiming
in an undertone, “Oh! the haughty dame it is!” Presently when she had
stepped down from her carriage and mounted to the great hall above,
the Queen did go forward to meet her only so far as the midmost of
the hall, or mayhap a little farther and somewhat nearer the entrance
door than the upper end. Yet did she receive her very graciously, and
showed her great honour; for at the time she was ruler in all things,
in view of the youth of the King her son, and did govern him and make
him entirely conform to her good pleasure. All the Court, great and
small alike, did esteem and much admire the said Princess, and much
appreciate her beauty, albeit she was coming nigh the decline of her
years, which might then be something over forty; yet was no sign of
change or decay in her, her Autumn altogether surpassing other women’s
Summer. None can do other than think highly of this fair Princess,
seeing how beautiful she was, and yet did safeguard her widowhood
to the tomb, and so inviolably and chastely, indulging in no third
marriage, keep her faith to the manes of her husband.

She did die within a year after hearing the news of her being Queen of
Denmark, whence she did spring, and the Kingdom of which had fallen to
her. In this wise before her death she did see her title of Highness,
the which she had borne so long, changed to that of Majesty, which yet
was hers but a short while, less than six months in all. I ween she
would gladly enough have borne the old title still, an if she could
have kept therewith her erstwhile bloom of youth and beauty, for truly
all empires and kingdoms be as nothing compared with youth. Natheless
was it an honour and consolation to her before her death to bear this
name of Queen; but for all this, by what I have heard say, she was firm
resolved not to go to her kingdom, but to finish out the rest of her
days on her jointure lands in Italy, at Tortona. And the folk of that
country did call her naught else but the Lady of Tortona—not a very
grand title and quite unworthy of her. Thither she had retired a good
while before her decease, as well for sake of certain vows she had
sworn to perform at the holy places of that region, as to be nearer
the baths of those parts; for she had fallen into bad health and grown
exceeding gouty.

Her life was spent in very pious, holy and honourable
exercises,—praying God and giving much alms and charity toward the
poor, and above all toward widows, among whom she did not forget the
unfortunate Madame Castellane of Milan, the which we have seen at Court
dragging out a miserable existence, had it not been for the help of
the Queen Mother, which did always provide her somewhat to live on.
She was daughter of the Princess of Macedonia, being a scion of that
great house. Myself have seen her a venerable and aged dame; and she
had been governess to her Highness. The latter, learning the extreme
poverty wherein the poor lady did live, sent to seek her out, and had
her brought to her side and did treat her so well she never more felt
the sore distress she had endured in France.

Such is the summary account I have been able to give of this great
and noble Princess, and how, a widow and a very beautiful woman, she
lived a most wise and prudent life. True, it may be said she was
married previously to the Duke Sforza. Well and good! but he did die
immediately after, and they were married less than a year, and she was
made a widow at fifteen or sixteen. Whereupon her uncle the Emperor
did wed her to the Duke of Lorraine, the better to strengthen himself
in his divers alliances. But once again she was widowed in the flower
of her age, having enjoyed her fine marriage but a very few years.
The days which were left her, the best of her life and those most
highly to be valued and most delightfully to be enjoyed, these she did
deliberately spend in a retired and chaste widowhood.

Well! seeing I am on the subject, I must e’en speak of some other fair
widows in briefest phrase,—and first of one of former days, that noble
widow, Blanche de Montferrat,[111*] one of the great and ancient
houses of Italy, which was Duchess of Savoy and the most beauteous and
most perfect Princess of her time, and one of the most prudent and well
advised. So well and wisely did she govern her son’s minority and his
lands, that never was seen so prudent a dame and so excellent a mother,
left a widow as she was at three and twenty.

She it was which did receive so honourably the young King Charles
VIII., on his way to his Kingdom of Naples, in all her lands, and
above all in her good town of Turin, where she did afford him a very
stately entry. Herself was pleased to be present, and did walk in the
progress very sumptuously attired, showing she well understood her
dignity as a great lady; for she was in imposing array, clad in a long
robe of cloth of gold fretted, and all bordered with great diamonds,
rubies, sapphires, emeralds, and other rich jewels. Her head likewise
was encircled with the like precious stones, while at her neck she
wore a necklace or collar of huge Oriental pearls of priceless worth,
and on her arms bracelets of the same. She was mounted on a fine white
hackney, very magnificently caparisoned and led by six tall lackeys,
dressed in figured cloth of gold. Following her came a large company of
damsels, very richly, neatly and charmingly dressed in the Piedmontese
fashion, that ’twas a pleasure to see them, and after these a very
strong body of gentlemen and knights of the country. Then after her
train did enter and march into the city King Charles himself under a
rich canopy of state, lighting down at length at the Castle, where
he was lodged. There at the Gate, before entering in, the Duchess of
Savoy did present her son to him, which was yet a mere boy; after which
she did make him a very excellent speech of welcome, putting at his
service all her lands and goods, both her own and those of her son.
This courtesy the King did accept with gratitude, thanking her heartily
and expressing great obligation to her. Through all the city were to
be seen the scutcheons of France and of Savoy, bound together with a
true lovers’ knot, uniting the two scutcheons and the two blazons,
with these words, _Sanguinis arctus amor_ (Close the tie of blood), as
described in the _Chronicle of Savoy_.[112*]

I have heard sundry of our fathers and mothers, which had it of their
own parents as eye-witnesses, and in especial of the noble lady, the
Séneschale de Poitou, my grandmother, who was then a maid of honour
at the Court, declare how in those days naught else was talked of but
the beauty, wisdom and prudence of this same Princess, and how all the
Courtiers and gallants of the King’s suite, when they were returned
back to France from their journey thither, were forever discoursing of
her and entertaining the dames and damsels of the Court with praises of
her beauty and virtue, and the King more than any, which did show every
sign of being smit to the heart with love for so beautiful a lady.

Yet apart from her beauty altogether, he had much occasion to love her
well; for she did help him by every means she could, and did even strip
her of all her precious stones, pearls and jewelry, to lend them him to
raise money on in whatsoever way seemed good to him. This was indeed a
great obligation and sacrifice, seeing what great attachment women do
always have for their precious stones, rings and jewelry, so as they
would almost rather lend and put in pawn some precious part of their
own body than their wealth of such things; I mean some would, though
not of course all. At any rate the kindness done was a very great
one; for but for this generosity, and likewise that of the Marquise
de Montferrat, another very noble and very fair lady, he would have
come to downright shame in no long time, and must have returned from
his expedition before it was half done, having undertaken the same
without money. Herein he was in the like sorry case with a certain
French Bishop that went to the Council of Trent without money and
without Latin. Verily a putting to sea without biscuit! Yet is there
a difference ’twixt the two; for what the one did was of his fine,
high spirit and noble ambition, the which did close his eyes to all
inconveniences, finding naught impossible to a brave heart, whereas the
other was in lack both of mother wit and proper experience, offending
out of sheer ignorance and stupidity, unless indeed it were that he
hoped to send round the bag when he got to his destination.

In the description given of this magnificent entry I have spoke of
just above, is to be noted the splendour of the attire and adornments
of this same Princess, which were more in accord (some will say) with
what is becoming a wife than a widow. On this the ladies did say at
the time that, to welcome so great a King, she might well be excused
so far, albeit he did hardly claim so great expenditure; and further
that great folk, men and women, be a law to themselves, and that in
those days widows, so they said, were not so straightlaced and exact
in their dress as they have been for the last forty years. The fact
is a certain great lady I wot of, being in high favour with a King,
indeed his mistress, did dress her somewhat in more quiet and modest
garb than most, yet always in silk, to the end she might the better
conceal and hide her game; wherefore the widows then at Court, being
fain to imitate her, did adopt the same fashion. Natheless was she by
no means so strict with herself, nor so stern in her moderation, but
that she dressed both prettily and richly, only all in black and white,
displaying more worldliness therein than did exactly accord with strict
widow’s weeds, and in especial ever making a point of showing her
beautiful bosom.

Myself did hear the Queen, mother of King Henri III., on occasion
of the coronation and marriage of that monarch, say the same: how
that widows in days gone by had not the same carefulness as to their
attire, modest bearing and strict life, as nowadays. She had seen this
in the time of King Francis, who did love an easy-going Court in all
respects. Widows did even dance thereat, and were taken as partners
as readily as maids or wives. In fact she did once command and beg M.
de Vaudemont,[113*] by way of honouring the occasion, to lead out the
Dowager Princess of Condé to the dance. This he did, and danced a full
round with her, as they which were present for the coronation, as I was
myself, did see and well remember. Such the freedom widows did then
enjoy. Nowadays all this is forbid them as if ’twere a sacrilege, as
also the wearing of colours, for none now dare wear aught but black
and white; though as for underskirts and petticoats, these as well
as their stockings, may be grey, drab, violet or blue. Some indeed I
have seen which have so far indulged them as to adopt red, scarlet and
chamois-yellow, as in former days; for they could then wear any colour
for bodices and stockings, though not for robes, by what I am told.

Moreover this same Duchess we have been speaking of might well enough
wear such a robe of cloth of gold, seeing ’twas her proper ducal habit
and state costume, and therefore becoming and lawful, for to display
the sovranty and high dignity of her exalted rank. And this is even now
done by our Countesses and Duchesses, the which can and do wear the
robes belonging to their several orders on state occasions. Only our
widows of to-day dare under no circumstances wear jewelry, except only
in rings, and on mirrors and _Books of Hours_ and the like, and set in
handsome belts, but not on neck or arms, or even any great display of
pearls in necklaces and bracelets. Yet I do declare solemnly I have
seen widows as becomingly attired in their white and black, and every
whit as attractively, as some of our tawdrily dressed wives and maids.


                                  5.

However enough said concerning this foreign Princess. ’Tis time to
say somewhat of our French Princesses, and I would wish first to deal
with our fair and unsullied Queen, Louise de Lorraine,[114*] wife of
King Henri III., late deceased. This Princess can and ought to be
commended on many grounds. In her marriage she did bear her towards
the King her husband so wisely, modestly and loyally, as that the knot
wherewith she was bound in wedlock with him did always remain so firm
and indissoluble, no breaking or slackness of the same was ever found,
and this although the King did sometimes wander elsewhither to satisfy
his passions, as great folks will, the which have a special freedom
accorded them. Beside this, quite at the very beginning of their
married life, in fact within ten days of their union, he did give her
no slight cause for displeasure, for that he did deprive her of her
women of the chamber and maids of honour, which had ever been with her
and in her service, when still a girl, whereat she was exceeding sorry.
’Twas a heavy blow to her affection, in especial for Mlle. de Changy,
a very fair and most honourable damsel, and one little deserving to be
banished the company of her mistress and expelled the Court. Indeed
’tis ever a sore despite to lose a trusty companion and confidante.
I have heard how one day a lady, one of her most privy friends, was
presuming enough to chide her and urge, by way of jest and half-serious
flaunt, that, seeing she could never have children by the King, for
many reasons then commonly alleged, she would do well to borrow secret
aid of some third person, for to have offspring, to the end she might
not be left without authority, supposing her husband did chance to die,
but might some day very like be Queen Mother of a King of France, and
hold the same rank and high estate as the Queen mother-in-law. But the
lady did long regret her counsel, semi-burlesque as it was; for the
Queen took the same exceeding ill, and did never after like her worthy
adviser, preferring to base her dignity on her chastity and virtuous
life rather than on a lineage sprung of evil-doing. Still the advice,
in a worldly point of view and according to Machiavelli’s doctrine, was
not to be despised.

Very different was the behaviour, so ’tis said, of Queen Mary of
England, third wife of King Louis XII. Being but ill-content and
distrustful of the feebleness of the King her husband, she was fain to
sound these waters for herself, taking for guide in crossing the ford
the noble Comte d’Angoulême, the same which was afterward King Francis,
then a young, handsome and charming Prince, to whom she did show much
favour, always addressing him as “My excellent son-in-law;” as indeed
he was, having already married Madame Claude, daughter of King Louis.
The fact is she was smit with love for him; and he on seeing her was
in much the same case. The end was the pair were very nigh coming
together, the which they would surely have done but for the late M.
de Grignaux,[115*] a nobleman of honour and good birth from Périgord,
a prudent and well advised man, who had been gentleman in waiting to
the Queen Anne, as we have above said, and was so still to Queen Mary.
He seeing the play was very like to come off, did chide the aforesaid
Comte d’Angoulême for the fault he was about to commit, saying with an
angry energy: “Nay! by the Risen God (this was his favourite oath),
what would you be at? See you not this woman, keen and cunning as she
is, is fain to draw you to her, to the end you may get her with child?
But an if she come to have a son, what of you? You are still plain
Comte d’Angoulême, and never King of France, as you do hope to be. The
King her husband is old, and cannot now make her children. You must
needs meddle and go with her, you with your young hot blood, and she
the same, and by the Risen Lord! the end will be she will just catch on
like a limed bird, conceive you a child, and there you are! After that
you’ve only to say, ‘Goodbye! my chance of the fair Kingdom of France!’
Wherefore I say, reflect.”

In fact the said Queen was for practising and proving true the Spanish
saw or proverb, which saith, _munca muger aguda murio sin herederos_,
“no clever woman ever died without heirs;” or in other words, an if
her husband make her none, she will call in other help to get her end.
Now M. d’Angoulême _did_ reflect and sware he was going to be wise
and refrain; yet tried and tempted again and again with the wiles
and advances of the fair Englishwoman, did presently throw him more
fiercely than ever into the pursuit of her. Such the effects of love
and passion! such the power of a mere bit of flesh and blood, that for
its sake men will surrender kingdoms and empires, and altogether lose
the same, as we find over and over again in History. Eventually M. de
Grignaux, seeing the young man was bent on his own undoing and the
carrying further of his amour, told Madame d’Angoulême, his mother, of
the matter, which did so reprove and smartly chide him, as that he gave
up the sport once and for all.

None the less ’tis said the Queen did all she could to live and reign
as Queen Mother for some little while before and after the death of the
King her husband. However she lost him too soon, and had no sufficient
time to carry through her purpose. Yet even so, she did spread the
report, after the King’s death, that she was pregnant. Accordingly,
albeit naught really inside her belly, ’tis said she would swell out
the outside thereof by means of linen wrappages gradually more and more
every day, and that when her full time was come, she did propose to
have ready a supposititious child of another woman, and produce this
at the instant of her pretended delivery. But the Queen Regent, which
was from Savoy and knew somewhat about child-bearing and the like,
seeing things were going somewhat too fast for her and her son, had
her so well watched and examined of physicians and midwives, that her
wrappages and clouts being noted, she was found out and baulked in her
design, and instead of being Queen Mother was incontinently sent back
to her own country.

See the difference betwixt this Princess Mary and our good Queen
Louise, which was so wise, chaste and virtuous, she did never desire,
whether by true or false pretence, to be Queen Mother. But an if she
had wished to play the like game as other, there would have been little
difficulty, for there was none to watch her with any care,—and ’twould
have sore surprised not a few. And for her behaviour our present King
doth owe her much thanks, and should love and honour her greatly; for
an if she had played this game, and had brought forward an infant, her
own or another’s, the King instead of being what he is, would have been
but a Regent of France, mayhap not even that. And this feeble title
would ill have guarded him from many more wars and troubles than he
hath actually had.

I have heard some, both men of religion and of the world, hold and
maintain this opinion: that our Queen would have done better to have
played this part, and that in that case France would never have endured
so much wretchedness, poverty and ruin as she hath now, and is like
to have, and the True Faith better supported into the bargain. As to
this I can but refer me to those gallant and curious questioners which
do debate these points (but myself do believe never a word of it, for
we be all right well satisfied with our King, God save him!) for them
to pronounce judgment thereon; for they have a fine subject, and one
admitting wide discussion as to the State’s best interests, though
not as to God’s, as seemeth me. To Him our Queen hath always been
deeply devoted, loving and adoring Him so well, that to serve Him,
she would e’en forget herself and her high estate. For being a very
beauteous Princess (the King indeed did choose her for her beauty and
high virtues), and young, tender and most charming, she did give up
herself to naught else but only to serve God, do her devotions, visit
constantly the hospitals, heal the sick and bury the dead, forgetting
nor omitting any of the good and holy works which in this province the
holy devout and righteous ladies, Princesses and Queens of days of
yore, did practise in the early Church. After the death of her husband,
she did ever lead the same life, spending her time in weeping and
mourning for him, beseeching God for his soul; and in fact her life as
a widow was of the same holy character as her married life had been.

’Tis true she was supposed, during her husband’s lifetime, to have
leaned somewhat to the side of the party of the _Union_, because, being
so good a Christian and Catholic as she was, she did naturally prefer
them which were fighting and contending for her Faith and Religion; yet
did she never more favour them, but quitted their faction altogether,
after their assassination of her husband, though claiming no other
vengeance of punishment as a right but what it should please God to
inflict, not that she did not duly petition men, and above all our
King, with whom lieth the performing of justice for this monstrous deed
of a man of religion.[116] Thus both an married life and widowhood,
did this excellent Princess live blameless. Eventually she died in the
enjoyment of a most noble and worthy repute, having long languished
in sickness and grown hectic and parched,—’twas said owing to her
overmuch indulgence in sorrow. She made a very excellent and pious end.
Just before her death, she had her crown placed at the head of her bed
close beside her, and would never have it removed from there so long as
she yet lived, directing that after her death she should be crowned and
so remain till her body was laid beneath the ground.

She did leave behind her a sister, Madame de Joyeuse,[117*] which was
her counterpart in her chaste and modest life, and did make great
mourning and lamentation for her husband; and verily he was a brave,
valiant and well accomplished Lord. Beside, I have heard say, how when
our present King was in such straits, and shut up and imprisoned as
in a bag in Dieppe, which the Duc du Maine held invested with forty
thousand men, that an if she had been in the place of the Commander of
the town De Chastes, she would have had revenge of the death of her
husband in a very different fashion from the said worthy Commander,
who for the obligations he lay under to M. de Joyeuse, ought never
to have surrendered, in her opinion. Nor did she ever like the man
afterward, but did hate him worse than the plague, being unable to
excuse a fault as he had committed, albeit others deem him to have
kept faith and loyalty according to his promises. But then an angry
woman, be the original cause of offence just or unjust, will take no
satisfaction; and this was the way with this Princess, who could never
bring herself to like our reigning monarch, though she did sore regret
the late King and wore mourning for him, and this although she did
belong to the _League_; for she always declared both her husband and
she did lie under many obligations to him. In fine, she is a good and
a wise Princess, and one that is honoured by the grief and respect
she did show to the ashes of her husband,—for some while that is, for
eventually she did marry again with M. de Luxembourg. So young as she
was, was she to consume away in vain regrets forever?


                                  6.

The Duchesse de Guise, Catherine of Clèves, one of the three daughters
of the house of Nevers (all three Princesses that can surely never be
enough commended, no less for their beauty than for their virtue and on
whom I have writ a separate chapter in another place), hath celebrated
and doth celebrate all her days in right worthy fashion the irreparable
loss of her noble husband; but indeed what a husband was he! He was
truly the nonpareil of the world, and this and no less she did call
him in sundry of her letters, the which she writ to some of her most
familiar friends and lady companions, which myself also did see after
her bereavement, showing them plainly therein by the sad and mournful
words she used with what sore regrets her soul was wounded.

Her noble sister-in-law, Madame de Montpensier,[118*] of whom I do
hope to speak further elsewhere, did also bewail her husband bitterly.
Albeit she did lose him when still very young, and beautiful and
charming for many perfections both of mind and body, she did never
think of marrying again,—and this although she had wedded him when a
mere child in years, and he might have been her grandfather, so that
she had tasted but sparely with him of the fruits of wedlock. Yet
would she never consent to indulge a second taste of the same and make
up her defect and arrears in that kind by another marriage.

I have heard not a few noblemen, gentlemen and great ladies oftentimes
express their wonder that the Princesse de Condé, the Dowager Princess
I mean, of the house of Longueville, did always refuse to marry again,
seeing how she was one of the most beautiful ladies in all France,
and one of the most desirable. But she did remain satisfied with her
condition of widowhood, and would never take a second husband, and this
though left a widow very young.

The Marquise de Rothelin, her mother, did the like, who beautiful
woman as she was, died a widow. Verily mother and daughter both might
well have set afire a whole kingdom with their lovely eyes and sweet
looks, the which were renowned at Court and through France for the
most charming and alluring ever seen. And doubtless they did fire many
hearts; yet never a word was ever to be spoke of love or marriage, both
having loyally kept the faith once pledged to their dead husbands, and
never married again.

I should never have done if I were to name all the Princesses of our
Kings’ Courts in similar case. I must e’en defer their panegyric to
another place. So I will leave them now, and say somewhat of sundry
other ladies, which though no Princesses, be yet of as illustrious race
and generous heart as they.

Fulvia Mirandola, Madame de Randan, of the noble house of Admirande,
did remain unwed, though left a widow in the flower of her age and
her exquisite beauty. So great mourning did she make over her loss,
that never more would she deign to look at herself in her mirror,
but refused the sight of her lovely face to the pellucid crystal that
was so fain to see the same. Her act though not her words were like
those of an ancient dame, which breaking her mirror and dedicating the
fragments to Venus, spake these words to the Goddess:

             Dico tibi Veneri speculum, quai cernere talem
                 Qualis sum nolo, qualis eram nequeo.

  (To thee, Venus, I do dedicate my mirror, for such as I am now, I
  care not to see myself, and such as I was, I cannot more.)

Not that Madame de Randan did scorn her mirror for this reason, for
indeed she was very beautiful, but by reason of a vow she had made to
her husband’s shade, who was one of the best and noblest gentlemen of
all France. For his sake she did altogether leave the world and its
vanities, dressing her always very soberly. She wore a veil habitually,
never showing her hair; yet spite of careless head-dress and her
neglect of appearances, her great beauty was none the less manifest.
The late M. de Guise, late deceased, was used always to call her naught
but _the nun_; for she was attired and put on like a religious. This he
would say by way of jest and merriment with her; for he did admire and
honour her greatly, seeing how well affectioned and attached she was to
his service and all his house.

Madame de Carnavalet, twice a widow, did refuse to wed for the third
time with M. d’Espernon, then known as M. de la Valette the younger,
and at the commencement of his high favour at Court. So deep was he
in love with her, that unable to get of her what he would so fain have
had, for truly she was a very lovely widow and very charming, he did
follow her up persistently and press her sore to marry him, inducing
the King three or four times over to speak to her in his favour. Yet
would she never put herself again under a husband’s yoke. She had been
married twice, her first husband being the Comte de Montravel, the
second M. de Carnavalet. And when her most privy friends, myself first
and foremost, who was much her admirer, did chide her for her fault
she was committing in refusing so high a match, one that would place
her in the very midmost and focus of greatness, wealth, riches, favour
and every dignity, seeing how M. de la Valette was chiefest favourite
of the King, and deemed of him only second to himself, she would
answer: that her delight lay not at all in these things, but in her own
free-will and the perfect liberty and satisfaction.

Madame de Bourdeille, sprung of the illustrious and ancient house of
Montbron and of the Counts of Périgord and Viscounts of Aunay, being
left a widow at the age of seven or eight and thirty, a very beautiful
woman (and I do think that in all Guienne, of which province she was,
was never another that in her day did surpass her in beauty, charm and
good looks, for indeed she had one of the finest, tallest and most
gracious figures could anywhere be seen, and if the body was fair the
mind was to match), being so desirable and now widowed, was wooed and
sought after in marriage by three great and wealthy Lords. To them all
she made reply as follows: “I will not say, as many dames do, that they
will never, never marry again, adding such asseverations you can in
no wise doubt their firm intention. But I am ready to declare that,
unless God and my carnal being give me not very different desire to
what I feel at this present, and change me utterly, I have very surely
said farewell forever to matrimony.” Then when another did further
object: “Nay! Madam, but would you wish to burn away in the flower of
your age?” she added: “I wot not what you mean by burning away; but
I do assure you that up to the present hour, it hath never yet been
possible for me to warm me even, all alone in my bed which is widowed
and cold as ice. Yet in the company of a second husband, I say not but
that, coming nigh his fire, I might not mayhap burn as you say. But
forasmuch as cold is more easy to endure than heat, I am resolved to
continue in my present condition, and abstain from a second marriage.”
And this resolve she did so express, she hath kept to this day, having
remained a widow twelve years, without losing aught of her beauty, ever
maintaining and holding sacred one fixed determination. This is truly a
great obligation to her husband’s ashes, and a testimony how well she
loved him, as well as an exceeding binding claim on her children to
honour her memory forever, seeing how she did end her days a widow.

The late M. d’Estrozze was one of the aspirants to her hand, and had
had his wishes conveyed to her. But great, noble and allied with the
Queen Mother as he was, she did refuse the match, excusing herself in
seemly terms. Yet what a strange humour, after all, to be beautiful,
honourable and a very rich heiress, and finish out one’s days over
a pen or a solitary seam, lone and cold as ice, and spend so many
widowed nights! Oh! how many dames there be of a very different
complexion,—though not a few also of the like! But an if I were for
citing all these, I should never have ended; and especially if I should
include among our Christian ladies those of pagan times. Of these was
that right fair, and good and gentle Roman lady of yore, Martia, second
daughter of Cato of Utica, sister to Portia, who after losing her
husband incessantly bewailing the said loss, being asked when would be
the last day of her mourning, did make answer ’twould be only when the
last day of her life should come. Moreover being both very beautiful
and very rich, she was more than once asked when she would marry again,
to which she replied: “’Twill be when I can find a man that will marry
me rather for my merits than for my wealth.” And God knoweth she was
both rich and beautiful, and no less virtuous, than either, nay! far
more so; else had she not been Cato’s daughter nor Portia’s sister. Yet
did she pass this rebuff on her lovers and suitors, and would have it
they did seek her for her wealth and not for her merits and virtues,
albeit she was as well furnished with these as any. Thus did she
readily rid her of these importunate gallants.

Saint Jerome in a letter he wrote to one Principia, a virgin, doth
celebrate the praises of a gentle Roman lady of his time, which was
named Marcella, of a good and noble house, and sprung from a countless
line of consuls, pro-consuls, Praetors, and one that had been left a
widow very young. She was much sought after, both for her youth and
for the antiquity of her house, as well as for her lovely figure, the
which did singularly entrance the will of men (so saith Saint Jerome,
using these very words; note his observation), and her seemly mien
and virtuous character. Among other suitors was a rich and high-born
Roman Lord, likewise of Consular rank, and by name Cerealis, which did
eagerly seek to persuade her to give him her hand in second marriage.
Being something far stricken in years, he did promise her great wealth
and superb gifts as chiefest advantage in the match. Above all her
mother, Albina by name, did strongly urge her to the marriage, thinking
it an excellent offer and one not lightly to be refused. But she made
answer: “An if I had any wish to throw myself in the water and entangle
me in the bonds of a second marriage, and not rather vow me to a
second chastity, yet would I fain prefer to get me an husband rather
an inheritance.” Then, the lover deeming she had said this with an eye
to his advanced age, he made reply: that old folk might very well live
long, and young ones die early. But she retorted: “True, the young may
die early, but an old man cannot live long.” At which word he did take
umbrage, and so left her. I find this fair lady’s saying admirable and
her resolve most commendable.

Not less so was that of Martia, named above, whose behaviour was not
so open to reproof as that of her sister Portia. For the latter, after
the death of her husband, did determine to live no longer, but kill
herself. Then all instruments of iron being removed, wherewith she
might have taken her life, she did swallow live coals, and so burned
all her inwards, declaring that for a brave woman means can never be
lacking whereby to contrive her death. This hath been well told by
Martial in one of his Epigrams, writ expressly on this lady’s fate, and
a fine poem it is. Yet did she not, according to certain philosophers,
and in especial Aristotle in his Ethics, (speaking of courage or
fortitude) show herein any high degree of courage or magnanimity in
killing herself, as many others have done, and her own husband; for
that, to avoid a greater ill, they do throw themselves upon the less.
On this point I have writ a discourse elsewhere.

Be this as it may, ’twould surely have been better, had this same
Portia rather devoted her days to mourning her husband and avenging
his death than in contriving her own. For this did serve no good end
whatsoever, except mayhap a gratification of her own pique, as I have
heard some women say in blame of her action. Natheless for myself, I
cannot enough commend her, and all other widows, which do show their
love for their dead husbands as lively as in their lifetime. And this
is why Saint Paul hath so highly praised and commended them, holding
this doctrine of his great Master. Yet have I been taught of some of
the most clear sighted and most eloquent persons I know, that beautiful
young widows which do remain in that condition in the very flower of
their sweet age and heyday of their life, do exercise an over great
cruelty upon themselves and nature, so to conspire against their own
selves, and refuse to taste again the gentle joys of a second marriage.
This much doth divine law no less than human allow them, as well as
nature, youth and beauty; yet must they needs abstain in obedience
to some vow and obstinate resolve, the which they have fantastically
determined in their silly heads to keep to the vain and empty simulacra
of their husbands, that standing like sentinels forgot in the other
world, and dwelling yonder in the Elysian fields, be either altogether
careless of them and their doings or mayhap do but deride the same.
On this question generally all such dames should refer them to the
eloquent remonstrances and excellent arguments the which Anna doth
bring forward to her sister Dido, in the Fourth Book of the Aeneid.
These be most excellent for to teach a fair young widow not over
sternly to swear a vow of never altering her condition, rather out of
bigotry than real religion. An if after their husbands’ death, they
should be crowned with fair chaplets of flowers or herbs, as was the
custom of yore, and as is still done with young maids in our day, this
triumph would be good and creditable while it lasted, and not of over
long duration. But now all that may be given them, is a few words of
admiration, the which do vanish into air so soon as spoken and perish
as quick as the dead man’s corse. Well then, let all fair young widows
recognise the world and its claims, since they be of it still, and
leave religion to old women and the strait rule to perpetual widowhood.


                                  7.

Well! enough said of widows which go fasting. ’Tis time now to speak
of another sort, to wit those which detesting all vows and abnegations
against second marriages, do wed again and once more claim the aid of
the gentle and agreeable God Hymen. Of such there be some which, over
fond of their admirers during their husband’s life, be already dreaming
of another match before these be well dead, planning aforehand betwixt
them and their lovers the sort of life they will lead together: “Ah,
me! an if mine husband were but dead,” they say, “we would do this,
we would do that; we would live after this pleasant fashion, we would
arrange it after that,—and all so discreetly none should ever suspect
our bygone loves. A right merry life we would have of it then; we
would go to Paris, to Court, and bear us so wisely naught should ever
do us hurt. You would pay court to such and such a great lady, I to
such and such a great nobleman; we would get this from the King, and
that. We would get our children provided with tutors and guardians, and
have never a care for their property and governance. Rather would we
be making our fortunes, or else enjoying theirs, pending their coming
of age. We would have plenishing enough, with that of mine husband to
boot; the last for sure we could not lack, for I wot well where be the
title deeds and good crown pieces. In a word, who so happy as we should
be?”—and so on and so on.

Such the fine words and pleasant plans these wives do indulge in to
their lovers by anticipation. Some of them do only kill their husbands
in wishes, words, hopes and longings; but others there be that do
actually haste them on the way to the tomb, if they be over laggard.
Cases of this sort have been, and are yet to-day, more plenty before
our Courts of Law and Parliaments than any would suppose. But verily
’tis better and more agreeable they do not as did a certain Spanish
dame. For being ill treated of her husband, she did kill him, and
afterward herself, having first writ this epitaph following, which she
left on the table in her closet, indited in her own hand:

         Aqui yaze qui a buscado una muger,
         Y con ella casado, no l’ha podido hazer muger,
         A las otras, no a mi, cerca mi, dava contentamiento,
         Y pore este, y su flaqueza y atrevimiento,
             Yo lo he matado,
         Por le dar pena de su pecado:
         Ya my tan bien, por falta de my juyzio,
         Y por dar fin à la mal-adventura qu’yo aviô.

  (Here lieth one which did seek a wife, yet could not satisfy a
  wife; to other women, but not me, though near me, he would give
  contentment. And for this, and for his cowardice and insolence, I
  have killed him, to punish him for his sins. Myself likewise I have
  done to death, for lack of understanding, and to make an end of the
  unhappy life I had.)

This lady was named Donna Madallena de Soria, the which, in the
judgment of some, did a fine thing to kill her husband for the wrong he
had done her; but did no less foolishly to slay herself,—and indeed she
doth admit as much, saying “for lack of understanding she did herself
to death.” She had done better to have led a merry life afterward,
were it not, mayhap, she did fear the law and dread to get within its
clutches, wherefore she did prefer to triumph over herself rather than
trust her repute to the authority of the Judges. I can assure you,
there have always been, and are yet women more astute than this; for
they do play their game so cunningly and covertly, that lo! you have
the husband gone to another world, and themselves living a merry life
and getting their complaisant gallants to give ’em no mere artificial
joys with _godemiches_ and the like, but the good, sound, real article.

Other widows there be which do show more wisdom, virtue and love toward
their late husbands, with never a suspicion of cruelty toward these.
Rather they do mourn, lament and bewail them with such extremity of
sorrow you would think they would not live one hour more. “Alackaday!”
they cry, “am not I the most unhappy woman in all the world, and the
most ill-starred to have lost so precious a possession? Gracious God!
why dost not kill me straight, that I may follow him presently to the
tomb? Nay! I care not to live on after him; for what is left me in
this world or can ever come to me, to give me solace? An it were not
for these babes he hath left me in pledge, and that they do yet need
some stay, verily I would kill myself this very minute. Cursed be the
hour ever I was born! If only I might see his ghost, or behold him in
a vision or dream, or by some magic art, how blessed should I be e’en
now! Oh! sweetheart, sweet soul! can I in no way follow thee in death?
Yea! I will follow thee, so soon as, free from all human hindrance,
I may be alone and do myself to death. What could make my life worth
living, now I have had so irreparable a loss? With thee alive I could
have no other wish but to live; with thee dead, no wish but only to
die! Well, well! is’t not better for me to die now in thy love and
favour and mine own good repute and satisfaction, than to drag on so
sorrowful and unhappy a life, wherein is never a scrap of credit to be
gotten? Great God! what ills and torments I endure by thine absence!
what a sweet deliverance, an if I might but see thee soon again, what
a crown of bliss! Alas! he was so handsome, he was so lovable! He was
another Mars, another Adonis! and more than all, he was so kind, and
loved me so true, and treated me so fondly! In one word, in losing him,
I have lost all mine happiness.”

Such and an infinity of the like words do our heart-broken widows
indulge in after the death of their husbands. Some will make their
moan in one way, others in another, but always something to the effect
of what I have set down. Some do cry out on heaven, others curse this
earth of ours; some do blaspheme God, others vent their spleen on the
world. Some again do feign to swoon, while others counterfeit death;
some faint away, and others pretend to be mad and desperate and out of
their wits, knowing no one and refusing to speak. In a word, I should
never have done, if I were to try to specify all the false, feigned,
affected tricks they do use for to prove their grief and mourning to
the world. Of course I speak not of all, but of some, and a fine few
these be and a good round number.

Good folk of either sex that would console suchlike doleful widows,
thinking no ill and supposing their grief genuine, do but lose their
pains and none is a whit the better. Others again of these comforters,
when they see the poor suffering object of their solicitude failing to
keep up the farce and make the proper grimaces, do instruct them in
their part, like a certain great lady I wot of, which would tell her
daughter, “Now faint, my pet; you don’t show near enough concern.”

Then presently, after all these wondrous rites performed, just like
a torrent that after dashing headlong down its course, doth anon
subside again and quietly return to its bed, or like a river that hath
overflowed its banks, so you will see these widows recover them and
return to their former complexion, gradually get back their spirits,
begin to be merry once again and dream of worldly vanities. Instead of
the death’s-heads they were used to wear, whether painted, engraven
or in relief, instead of dead men’s bones set crosswise or enclosed
in coffins, instead of tears, whether of jet or of enamelled gold, or
simply painted, you will see them now adopt portraits of their husbands
worn round the neck, though still adorned with death’s-heads and tears
painted in scrolls and the like, in fact sundry little gewgaws, yet
all so prettily set off that spectators suppose they do use and wear
the same rather by way of mourning for their deceased husbands than
for worldly show. Then presently, just as we see young birds, whenas
they quit the parental nest, do not at the very first make very long
flights, but fluttering from branch to branch do little by little
learn the use of their wings, so these widows, quitting their mourning
habits and desperate grief, do not appear in public at once, but taking
greater and greater freedom by degrees, do at last throw off their
mourning altogether, and toss their widows’ weeds and flowing veil to
the dogs, as the saying is, and letting love more than ever fill their
heads, do dream of naught else but only a second marriage or other
return to wanton living. So we find their great and violent sorrow
hath no long duration. It had been better far to have exercised more
moderation in their sorrow.

I knew once a very fair lady, which after her husband’s death was so
woebegone and utterly cast down that she would tear her hair, and
disfigure her cheeks and bosom, pulling the longest face ever she
could. And when folk did chide her for doing such wrong to her lovely
countenance, “My God!” she would cry, “what would you have? What use is
my pretty face to me now? Who should I safeguard it for, seeing mine
husband is no more?” Yet some eight months later, who but she is making
up her face with Spanish white and rouge and besprinkling her locks
with powder,—a marvellous change truly?

Hereof I will cite an excellent example, for to prove my contention,
that of a fair and honourable lady of Ephesus, which having lost her
husband could find no consolation whatever in spite of all efforts of
kinsmen and friends. Accordingly following her husband’s funeral, with
endless grief and sorrow, with sobs, cries, tears and lamentations,
after he was duly put away in the charnel-house where his body was to
rest, she did throw herself therein in spite of all that could be done
to hinder, swearing and protesting stoutly she would never leave that
place, but would there tarry to the end and finish her days beside her
husband’s corpse and never, never abandon the same. This resolution
she did hold to, and did actually so live by the space of two or three
days. Meantime, as fortune would have it, a man of those parts was
executed for some crime and hanged in the city, and afterward carried
forth the walls to the gibbets there situate to the end of the bodies
of malefactors so hanged and put to death should there remain for an
example to others, carefully watched by a band of officers and soldiers
to prevent their being carried off. So it fell out that a soldier that
was guarding the body, and was standing sentry, did hear near by a
very lamentable voice crying and approaching perceived ’twas in the
charnel-house. Having gone down therein, he beheld the said lady, as
fair and beautiful as day, all bathed in tears and lamenting sore; and
accosting her, set him to enquiring the reason of her pitiful state,
the which she told him gently enough. Thereupon doing his endeavours
to console her grief, but naught succeeding for the first time, he did
return again and once again. Finally he was enabled to gain his point,
and did little by little comfort her and got her to dry her eyes; till
at length hearkening to reason, she did yield so far as that he had her
twice over, holding her on her back on the very coffin of her husband,
which did serve as their couch. This done, they did swear marriage,
one with the other; after which happy consummation, the soldier did
return to his duty, to guard the gibbet,—for ’twas a matter of life
and death to him. But fortunate as he had been in this fine enterprise
of his and its carrying out, his misfortune now was such that while he
was so inordinately taking his pleasure, lo! the kinsfolk of the poor
dangling criminal did steal up, for to cut the body down, an if they
should find it unguarded. So finding no guard there, they did cut it
down with all speed, and carried the corpse away with them swiftly, to
bury it where they might, to the end they might rid them of so great
dishonour and a sight so foul and hateful to the dead man’s kindred.
The soldier coming up and finding the body a-missing, hied him in
despair to his mistress, to tell her his calamity and how he was ruined
and undone; for the law of that country was that any soldier which
should sleep on guard and suffer the body to be carried off, should
he put in its place and hanged instead, which risk he did thus run.
The lady, who had but now been consoled of him, and had felt sore need
of comfort for herself, did quick find the like for him, and said as
follows: “Be not afeared; only come help me to lift mine husband from
his tomb, and we will hang him and set him up in place of the other; so
they will take him for the other.” No sooner said than done. Moreover
’tis said the first occupant of the gibbet had had an ear cut off; so
she did the same to the second, the better to preserve the likeness.
Next day the officers of justice did visit the place, but found naught
amiss. Thus did she save her gallant by a most abominable deed and
wicked act toward her husband,—the very same woman, I would have you
note, which had so grievously deplored and lamented his loss, so that
no man would ever have expected so shameful an issue.

The first time ever I heard this history, ’twas told by M.
d’Aurat,[119*] which did relate it to the gallant M. du Gua and sundry
that were dining with him. M. du Gua was not one to fail to appreciate
such a tale and to profit thereby, no man in all the world loving
better a good anecdote or better able to turn the same to account.
Accordingly soon after, being come into the Queen’s chamber, he saw
there a young, new-made widow, but just bereaved and all disconsolate,
her veil drawn half way down her face, sad and pitiful, with scarce
a word for any man. Of a sudden M. du Gua said to me: “Dost see
yonder widow? well! before a year be out, she will one day be doing
as the lady of Ephesus did.” And so she did, though not altogether so
shamefully; but she did marry a man of base condition, even as M. du
Gua had foretold.

The same story I had also of M. de Beau-Joyeux, valet of the chamber to
the Queen Mother, and the best violin player in Christendom. Not only
was he perfect in his art and music generally, but he was likewise of
an amiable disposition, and well instructed, above all in excellent
tales and fine stories, little known and of rare quality. Of these he
was by no means niggardly with his more intimate friends, and beside
could relate sundry from his own experience, for in his day he had both
seen many good love adventures and had not a few of his own; for what
with his noble gift of music and his good, bold spirit, two weapons
very meet for love, he could carry far. The Maréchal de Brissac had
given him to the Queen Mother, having sent him to her from Piedmont
with his company of violins, the whole most exquisite and complete.
He was then called Baltazarin, but did after change his name. Of his
composition were those pretty ballets that be always danced at Court.
He was a great friend of M. du Gua and myself; and we would often
converse together. On these occasions he had always some good tale
ready to tell, especially of love and ladies’ wiles. Among such he did
tell us that of the lady of Ephesus, already heard from M. d’Aurat,
as I have mentioned, who said he had it from Lampridius. Since then I
have read it also in the _Book of Obsequies_ (des Funérailles), a right
excellent work, dedicated to the late M. de Savoie.

The author might surely have spared us this digression, some may
object. Yea!—but then I was fain to make mention of my friend
hereanent, which did oft bring the story to my mind, whenever he beheld
any of our woe-begone widows. “Look!” he would exclaim, “see yonder one
that will some day play the part of our lady of Ephesus, or else mayhap
she hath played it already.” And by my faith, ’twas a mighty strange
tragi-comedy, an act full of heartlessness, so cruelly to insult her
dead husband.

At the massacre of the Saint Bartholomew was slain the Seigneur de
Pleuviau, who in his time had been a right gallant soldier, without a
doubt, in the War of Tuscany under M. de Soubise, as well as in the
Civil War, as he did plainly show at the battle of Jarnac, being in
command of a regiment there, and in the siege of Niort. Some while
after the soldier which had killed him did inform his late wife,
all distraught with grief and tears,—she was both beautiful and
wealthy,—that an if she would not marry him, he would kill her and make
her go the same way as her husband; for at that merry time, ’twas all
fighting and cut-throat work. The unhappy woman accordingly, which was
still both young and fair, was constrained, for to save her life, to
celebrate wedding and funeral all in one. Yet was she very excusable;
for indeed what could a poor fragile, feeble woman have done else,
unless it had been to kill herself, or give her tender bosom to the
murderous steel? But verily

               Le temps n’est plus, belle bergeronnette,

                (Those days be done, fair shepherdess;)

and these fond fanatics of yore exist no more. Beside, doth not our
holy Christian faith forbid it? This is a grand excuse for all widows
nowadays, who always say,—and if ’twere not forbid of God, they would
kill themselves. Thus do they mask their inaction.

At this same massacre was made another widow, a lady of very good
family and most beauteous and charming. The same, while, yet in the
first desolation of widowhood, was forced by a gentleman that I know
well enough by name; whereat was she so bewildered and disconsolate she
did well nigh lose her senses for some while. Yet presently after she
did recover her wits and making the best of her widowhood and going
back little by little to worldly vanities and regaining her natural
lively spirits, did forget her wrongs and make a new match, gallant and
high-born. And in this I ween she did well.

I will tell yet another story of this massacre. Another lady which was
there made a widow by the death of her husband, murdered like the rest,
was in such sorrow and despair thereat, that whenever she did set eyes
on a poor unoffending Catholic, even though he had not taken part in
the celebration at all, she would either faint away altogether, or
would gaze at him with as much horror and detestation as though he were
the plague. To enter Paris, nay! to look at it from anywhere in the
neighbourhood within two miles, was not to be thought of, for neither
eyes nor heart could bear the sight. To see it, say I?—why! she could
not bear so much as to hear it named. At the end of two years, however,
she did think better, and hies her away willingly enough to greet the
good town, and visit the same, and drive to the Palace in her coach.
Yet rather than pass by the Rue de la Huchette, where her husband had
been killed, she would have thrown herself headlong into fire and
destruction rather than into the said street,—being herein like the
serpent, which according to Pliny, doth so abhor the shade of the ash
as that ’twill rather adventure into the most blazing fire than under
this tree so hateful is it to the creature.

In fact, the late King, the then reigning King’s brother, was used
to declare he had never seen a woman so desperate and haggard at her
loss and grief as this lady, and that ’twould end by their having to
bring her down and hood her, as they do with haggard falcons. But after
some while he found she was prettily enough tamed of her own accord,
in such sort she would suffer herself to be hooded quite quietly and
privily, without any bringing down but her own will. Then after some
while more, what must she be at but embrace her Paris with open arms
and regard its pleasures with a very favourable eye, parading hither
and thither through its streets, traversing the city up and down, and
measuring its length and breadth this way and that, without ever a
thought of any vow to the contrary. Mighty surprised was I myself one
day, on returning from a journey, after an absence of eight months from
Court, when after making my bow to the King, I did suddenly behold this
same widow entering the great Hall of the Louvre, all tricked out and
bedecked, accompanied by her kinswomen and friends, and there appearing
before the King and Queen, the Royal personages and all the Court, and
there receiving the first orders of marriage, affiancing to wit, at the
hands of a Prelate, the Bishop of Digne, Grand Almoner of the Queen of
Navarre. Who so astonished as I? Yet by what she did tell me after, she
was even more astounded, whenas thinking me far away, she saw me among
the noble company present at her affiancing, standing there gazing at
her and challenging her with mine eyes. Neither of us could forget the
oaths and affirmations made betwixt us, for I had been her admirer and
suitor for her hand and indeed she thought I had come thither of set
purpose to appear on the appointed day to be witness against her and
judge of her faithlessness, and condemn her false behaviour. She told
me further, how that she would liever have given ten thousand crowns of
her wealth than that I should have appeared as I did, and so helped to
raise up her conscience against her.

I once knew a very great lady, a widowed Countess, of the highest
family, which did the like. For being a Huguenot of the most rigorous
sort, she did agree to a match with a very honourable Catholic
gentleman. But the sad thing was that before the completion of the
marriage, a pestilential fever that was epidemic at Paris did seize her
so sore as to bring her to her end. In her anguish, she did give way
to many and bitter regrets, crying: “Alas! can it be that in a great
city like Paris, where all learning doth abound, never a doctor can be
found to cure me! Nay! let him never stop for money; I will give him
enough and to spare. At any rate ’twere not so bitter, an if my death
had but come after my marriage, and my husband had learned first how
well I loved and honoured him!” (Sophonisba said differently, for she
did repent her of having wedded before drinking the poison.) Saying
these and other words of like tenour the poor Countess did turn her to
the other side of the bed, and so died. Truly this is the very fervour
of love, so to go about to remember, in midst of the Stygian passage to
oblivion, the pleasures and fruits of passion she would so fain have
tasted of, before quitting the garden!

I have heard speak of another lady, which being sick unto death,
overhearing one of her kinsfolk abusing another (yet are they very
worthy folk really), and upbraiding her with the enormous size of her
parts, she did start a-laughing and cried out, “You pair of fools,
you!” and so turning o’ the other side, she did pass away with the
laugh on her lips.

Well! an if these Huguenot dames have made such matches, I have
likewise known plenty of Catholic ladies that have done the same,
and wedded Huguenot husbands, and that after using every hang-dog
expression of them and their religion. If I were to put them all
down, I should never have done. And this is why your widow should
always be prudent, and not make so much noise at the first beginning
of her widowhood, screaming and crying, making storms of thunder and
lightning, with tears for rain, only afterward to give up her shield
of defence and get well laughed at for her pains. Better far it were
to say less, and do more. But themselves do say to this: “Nay! nay! at
the first beginning we must needs steel our hearts like a murderer, and
put on a bold front, resolved to swallow every shame. This doth last a
while, but only a while; then presently, after being chief dish on the
table and most observed of all, we be left alone and another takes our
place.”

I have read in a little Spanish work how Vittoria Colonna, daughter of
the great Fabrice Colonna, and wife to the great and famous Marquis de
Pescaïre, the nonpareil of his time, after losing her husband,—and God
alone knoweth how good an one he was,—did fall into such despair and
grief ’twas impossible to give or afford her any consolation whatever.
When any did offer any form of comfort, old or new, she would answer
them: “For what would you give me consolation?—for my husband that is
dead? Nay! you deceive yourselves; he is not dead. He is yet alive,
I tell you, and stirring within mine heart. I do feel him, every day
and every night, come to life and move and be born again in me.” Very
noble words indeed these had been, if only after some while, having
taken farewell of him and sent him on his way over Acheron, she had
not married again with the Abbé de Farfe,—an ill match to the noble
Pescaïre. I mean not in family, for he was of the noble house of
the Des Ursins, the which is as good, and eke as ancient, as that
of Avalos,—or more so. But the merits of the one did far outweight
those of the other, for truly those of Pescaïre were inestimable, and
his valour beyond compare, while the said Abbé, albeit he gave much
proof of his bravery, and did work very faithfully and doughtily in
the service of King Francis, was yet employed only in small, obscure
and light emprises, far different from those of the other, which had
wrought great and conspicuous deeds, and won right famous victories.
Moreover the profession of arms followed by the Marquis, begun and
regularly pursued from his youth up, could not but be finer far than
that of a churchman, which had but late in life taken up the hardier
calling.

Saying this, I mean not to imply thereby think ill of any which after
being vowed to God and the service of his Church, have broke the vow
and left the profession of religion for to set hands to weapons of war;
else should I be wronging many and many a great Captain that hath been
a priest first and gone through this experience.


                                  8.

Cæsar Borgia,[120*] Duc de Valentinois, was he not first of all
a Cardinal, the same which afterward was so great a Captain that
Machiavelli, the venerable instructor of Princes and great folk, doth
set him down for example and mirror to all his fellows, to follow after
and mould them on him? Then we have had the famous Maréchal de Foix,
which was first a Churchman and known as the Protonotary de Foix, but
afterward became a great Captain. The Maréchal Strozzi likewise was
first vowed to holy Church; but for a red hat which was refused him,
did quit the cassock and take to arms. M. de Salvoison, of whom I have
spoke before (which did follow close at the former’s heels, and was as
fit as he to bear the title of great Captain,—and indeed would have
marched side by side with him, an if he had been of as great a house,
and kinsman of the Queen), was, by original profession, a wearer of the
long robe; yet what a soldier was he! Truly he would have been beyond
compare, if only he had lived longer. Then the Maréchal de Bellegarde,
did he not carry the lawyer cap, being long named the Provost of Ours?
The late M. d’Enghien, the same that fell at the battle of St. Quentin,
had been a Bishop; the Chevalier de Bonnivet the same. Likewise that
gallant soldier M. de Martigues had been of the Church; and, in brief,
an host of others, whose names I cannot spare paper to fill in. I must
say a word too of mine own people, and not without good cause. Captain
Bourdeille, mine own brother, erst the Rodomont of Piedmont in
all ways, was first dedicate to the Church. But not finding that to be
his natural bent, he did change his cassock for a soldier’s jacket, and
in a turn of the hand did make him one of the best and most valiant
captains in all Piedmont. He would for sure have become a great and
famous man, had he not died, alas! at only five and twenty years of age.

In our own day and at our own Court of France, we have seen many such,
and above all our little friend, the noble Clermont-Tallard, whom I
had seen as Abbé of Bon-Port, but who afterward leaving his Abbey, was
seen in our army and at Court, one of the bravest, most valiant and
worthy men of the time. This he did show right well by his glorious
death at La Rochelle, the very first time we did enter the fosse of
that fortress. I could name a thousand such, only I should never have
done. M. de Soleillas,[121] known as the young Oraison, had been Bishop
of Riez and after had a regiment, serving his King right faithfully and
valiantly in Guienne, under the Maréchal de Matignon.

In short I should never have done, an if I were for enumerating all
such cases. Wherefore I do stop, both for brevity’s sake, and also for
fear I be reproached for that I indulge overmuch in digressions. Yet is
this one not inopportune I have made, when speaking of Vittoria Colonna
which did marry the Abbé. An if she had not married again with him, she
had better deserved her name and title of Vittoria, by being victorious
over herself. Seeing she could not find a second husband to match the
first, she should have refrained her altogether.

I have known many ladies which have copied her however. One I knew
did marry one of mine uncles, the most brave, valiant and perfect
gentleman of his time. After his death, she did marry another as much
like him as an ass to a Spanish charger; but ’twas mine uncle was the
Spanish steed. Another lady I knew once, which had wedded a Marshal of
France,[122*] a handsome, honourable gentleman and a valiant; in second
wedlock she did take one in every way his opposite, and one that had
been a Churchman too. What was yet more blameworthy in her was this,
that on going to Court, where she had not appeared for twenty years,
not indeed since her second marriage, she did re-adopt the name and
title of her first husband. This is a matter our courts of law and
parliament should look into and legislate against; for I have seen an
host of others which have done the like, herein unduly scorning their
later husbands, and showing them unwilling to bear their name after
their death. For having committed the fault, why! they should drink the
cup to the dregs and feel themselves bound by what they have done.

Another widow I once knew, on her husband’s dying, did make such sore
lamentation and so despairing by the space of a whole year, that ’twas
hourly expected to see her dead right off. At the end of a year, when
she was to leave off her heavy mourning and take to the lighter, she
said to one of her women: “Prithee, pull me in that crêpe becomingly;
for mayhap I may make another conquest.” But immediately she did
interrupt herself: “Nay! what am I talking about? I am dreaming. Better
die than have anything more to do with such follies.” Yet after her
mourning was complete, she did marry again to a husband very unequal
to the first. “But,”—and this is what these women always say,—“he was
of as good family as the other.” Yes! I admit it; but then, what of
virtue and worth? are not these more worth counting than all else?
The best I find in it all is this, that the match once made, their
joy therein is far from long; for God doth allow them to be properly
ill-treated of their new lords and bullied. Soon you will see them all
repentance,—when it is too late.

These dames which do thus re-marry have some opinion or fancy in their
heads we wot not of. So have I heard speak of a Spanish lady, which
desiring to marry again, when they did remonstrate with her, asking
what was to become of the fond love her husband had borne her, did
make answer: _La muerte del marido y nuevo casamiento no han de romper
el amor d’una casta muger_,—“The death of husband and a new marriage
should in no wise break up the love of a good woman.” Well! so much
shall be granted, an if you please. Another Spanish dame said better,
when they were for marrying her again: _Si hallo un marido bueno,
no quiero tener el temor de perderlo; y si malo, que necessidad he
del_,—“An if I find a good husband, I wish not to be exposed to the
fear of losing him; but if a bad, what need to have one at all?”

Valeria, a Roman lady, having lost her husband, whenas some of her
companions were condoling with her on his loss and death, said thus to
them: “’Tis too true he is dead for you all, but he liveth in me for
ever.” The fair Marquise I have spoke of a little above, had borrowed a
like phrase from her. These expressions of these noble ladies do differ
much from what a Spanish ill-wisher of the sex declared, to wit: _que
la jornada de la biudez d’ una muger es d’un dia_,—“that the day of a
woman’s widowhood is one day long.” A lady I must now tell of did much
worse. This was Madame de Moneins, whose husband was King’s lieutenant,
and was massacred at Bordeaux, by the common folk in a salt-excise
riot. So soon as ever news was brought her that her husband had been
killed and had met the fate he did, she did straight cry out: “Alas!
my diamond, what hath become of it?” This she had given him by way of
marriage present, being worth ten to twelve hundred crowns of the money
of the day, and he was used to wear it always on his finger. By this
exclamation she did let folk plainly see which grief she did bear the
more hardly, the loss of her husband or that of the diamond.

Madame d’Estampes was a high favourite with King Francis, and for that
cause little loved of her husband. Once when some widow or other came
to her asking her pity for her widowed state, “Why! dear heart,” said
she, “you are only too happy in your condition, for I tell you, one
cannot be a widow by wishing for’t,”—as if implying she would love to
be one. Some women be so situate, others not.

But what are we to say of widows which do keep their marriage hid, and
will not have it published? One such I knew, which did keep hers under
press for more than seven or eight years, without ever consenting to
get it printed and put in circulation. ’Twas said she did so out of
terror of her son,[123*] as yet only a youth, but afterward one of the
bravest and most honourable men in all the world, lest he should play
the deuce with her and her man, albeit he was of very high rank. But
so soon as ever her son fell in a warlike engagement, dying so as to
win a crown of glory, she did at once have her marriage printed off and
published abroad.

I have heard of another widow, a great lady, which was married to a
very great nobleman and Prince, more than fifteen years agone. Yet doth
the world know nor hear aught thereof, so secret and discreet is it
kept. Report saith the Prince was afeared of his mother-in-law, which
was very imperious with him, and was most unwilling he should marry
again because of his young children.

I knew another very great lady, which died but a short while agone,
having been married to a simple gentleman for more than twenty years,
without its being known at all, except by mere gossip and hearsay. Ho!
but there be some queer cases of the sort!

I have heard it stated by a lady of a great and ancient house, how
that the late Cardinal du Bellay was wedded, being then Bishop and
Cardinal, to Madame de Chastillon, and did die a married man. This she
did declare in a conversation she held with M. de Mane, a Provençal,
of the house of Senjal and Bishop of Fréjus, which had served the said
Cardinal for fifteen years at the Court of Rome, and had been one of
his privy protonotaries. Well! happening to speak of the Cardinal, she
did ask M. de Mane if he had ever told him or confessed to him that he
was married. Who so astounded as M. de Mane at such a question? He is
yet alive and can contradict me, if I lie; for I was present. He made
answer he had never heard him speak of it, either to him or to others.
“Well, then! I am the first to tell you,” she replied; “for nothing is
more true than that he was so married; and he died actually the husband
of the said Madame de Chastillon, before a widow.” I can assure you I
had a fine laugh, seeing the astonished face of poor M. de Mane, who
was a very careful and religious man, and thought he knew every secret
of his late master; but he was out of court for this one. And indeed
’twas a scandalous license on the Cardinal’s part, considering the
sacred office he held.

This Madame de Chastillon was the widow of the late M. de Chastillon,
the same which was said to chiefly govern the young King Charles VIII.
along with Bourdillon, Galiot and Bonneval, the guardians of the blood
royal. He died at Ferrara, having been wounded at the siege of Ravenna,
and carried thither to be healed. She became a widow when very young,
being both fair and also wise and virtuous,—albeit but in appearance,
as witness this marriage of hers,—and so was chosen maid of honour to
the late Queen of Navarre. She it was that did tender the excellent
advice to this noble lady and great Princess, which is writ in the
_Cent Nouvelles_ of the said Queen. The tale is of her and a certain
gentleman which had slipped by night into her bed by a little trap-door
in the wainscot beside her bed, and was fain to enjoy the reward of
his address; yet did win naught but some fine scratches on his pretty
face. The Queen being purposed to make complaint of the matter to her
brother, he did remonstrate with her very judiciously, as may be read
in the _Nouvelle_ or Tale in question, and did give her the excellent
advice referred to, as good and judicious and as well adapted to avoid
scandal as could possibly be devised. Indeed it might have been a First
President of the Parliament of Paris that gave the advice, which did
show plainly, however, the lady to be no less skilled and experienced
in such mysteries than wise and judicious; wherefore there can be
little doubt she did keep her affair with the Cardinal right well
hidden.

My grandmother, the Séneschale de Poitou, had her place after her
death, by choice of King Francis himself, which did name and elect her
to the post, sending all the way to her home to summon her. Then he
did give her over with his own hand to the Queen his sister, forasmuch
as he knew her to be a very prudent and very virtuous lady,—indeed
he was used to call her _my knight without reproach_,—albeit not so
experienced, adroit and cunning in suchlike matters as her predecessor,
nor one that had contracted a second marriage under the rose. But an if
you would know who are intended in the Tale, ’twas writ of the Queen of
Navarre herself and the Admiral de Bonnivet, as I have been assured by
my grandmother. Yet doth it appear to me the Queen need never have been
at pains to conceal her name, seeing the other could get no hold over
her virtue, but did leave her all in confusion. Indeed she was only too
wishful to make the facts public, had it not been for the good and wise
advice given her by that same maid of honour, Madame de Chastillon.
Anyone that hath read the Tale will find it as I have represented
it. And I do believe that the Cardinal, her husband as aforesaid,
which was one of the cleverest and wisest, most eloquent, learned and
well-advised men of his day, had instilled this discreetness in her
mind, to make her speak so well and give such excellent counsel. The
tale might mayhap be thought somewhat over scandalous by some in view
of the sacred and priestly profession of the Cardinal; but, an if any
be fain to repeat the same, well! he must e’en suppress the name.

Well! if this marriage was kept secret, ’twas by no means so with that
of the last Cardinal de Chastillon.[124*] For indeed he did divulge
and make it public quite enough himself, without need to borrow any
trumpet; and did die a married man, without ever having quitted his
gown and red hat. On the one hand he did excuse himself by alleging the
reformed faith, whereof he was a firm adherent; on the other by the
contention that he was desirous of still retaining his rank and not
giving up the same (a thing he would most surely never have done in any
case), so as he might continue of the council, whereof being a member
he could well serve his faith and party. For ’tis very true he was a
most able, influential and very powerful personage.

I do imagine the aforenamed noble Cardinal du Bellay may have done
the like for like reasons. For at that time he was no little inclined
to the faith and doctrine of Luther, and indeed the Court of France
generally was somewhat affected by the taint. The fact is, all
novelties be pleasing at first, and beside, the said doctrine did open
an agreeable license to all men, and especially to ecclesiastics, to
enter the married state.


                                  9.

However let us say no more of these dignified folk, in view of the deep
respect we do owe their order and holy rank. We must now something put
through their paces those old widows we wot of that have not six teeth
left in their chops, and yet do marry again. ’Tis no long while agone
that a lady of Guienne, already widowed of three husbands, did marry
for a fourth a gentleman of some position in that province, she being
then eighty. I know not why she did it, seeing she was very rich and
had crowns in plenty,—indeed ’twas for this the gentleman did run after
her,—unless it were that she was fain not to surrender just yet, but to
win more amorous laurels to add to her old ones, as Mademoiselle Sevin,
the Queen of Navarre’s jester, was used to say.

Another great lady I knew, which did remarry at the age of seventy-six,
wedding a gentleman of a lower rank than her previous husband, and did
live to an hundred. Yet did she continue beautiful to the last, having
been one of the finest women of her time, and one that had gotten every
sort of delight out of her young body, both as wife and widow, so ’twas
said.

Truly a formidable pair of women, and of a right hot complexion! And
indeed I have heard experienced bakers declare how that an old oven is
far easier to heat than a new one, and when once heated, doth better
keep its heat and make better bread.

I wot not what savoury appetites they be which do stir husbands
and lovers to prefer these hot-loaf dainties; but I have seen many
gallant and brave gentlemen no less eager in love, nay! more eager,
for old women than for young. They tell me ’twas to get worldly profit
of them; but some I have seen also, which did love such with most
ardent passion, without winning aught from their purse at all, except
that of their person. So have we all seen erstwhile a very great and
sovran Prince,[125] which did so ardently love a great dame, a widow
and advanced in years, that he did desert his wife and all other
women, no matter how young and lovely, for to sleep with her only.
Yet herein was he well advised, seeing she was one of the fairest and
most delightsome women could ever be seen, and for sure her winter was
better worth than the springtide, summer and autumn of the rest. Men
which have had dealings with the courtesans of Italy have seen, and do
still see, not a few cases where lovers do choose the most famous and
long experienced in preference, and those that have most shaken their
skirts, hoping with them to find something more alluring in body or in
wit. And this is why the beauteous Cleopatra, being summoned of Mark
Antony to come see him, was moved with no apprehension, being well
assured that, inasmuch as she had known how to captivate Julius Cæsar
and Gnæus Pompeius, the son of Pompey the Great, when she was yet but
a slip of a girl, and knew not thoroughly the ways and wiles of her
trade, she could manage better still her new lover, a very fleshly and
coarse soldier of a man, now that she was in the full fruition of her
experience and ripe age. Nor did she fail. In fact, the truth is that,
while youth is most meet to attract the love of some men, with others
’tis maturity, a sufficient age, a practised wit, a long experience, a
well-hung tongue and a well trained hand, that do best serve to seduce
them.

There is one doubtful point as to which I did one time ask doctors’
opinion,—a question suggested by one who asked why his health was not
better, seeing all his life long he had never known nor touched old
women, according to the physicians’ aphorism which saith: _vetulam non
cognovi_, “I have known never an old woman.” Among many other quaint
matters, be sure of this,—these doctors did tell me an old proverb
which saith: “In an old barn is fine threshing, but an old flail is
good for naught.” Others say: “Never mind how old a beast be, so it
will bear.” I was told moreover that in their practice they had known
old women which were so ardent and hot-blooded, that cohabiting with
a young man, they do draw all ever they can from him, taking whatever
he hath of substance, the better to moisten their own drouth; I speak
of such as by reason of age be dried up and lack proper humours. The
same medical authorities did give me other reasons to boot; but an if
readers be still curious, I leave them to ask further for themselves.

I have seen an aged widow, and a great lady too, which did put under
her tooth in less than four years a third husband and a young nobleman
she had taken for lover; and did send the pair of them under the sod,
not by violence or poison, but by mere enfeeblement and distillation of
their substance. Yet to look at this lady, none had ever supposed her
capable of aught of the sort; for indeed, before folk she did rather
play the prude and poor-spirited hypocrite, actually refusing to change
her shift in presence of her women for fear of their seeing her naked.
But as one of her kinswomen declared, these objections were all for
her women, not for her lovers and admirers.

But come, what is the difference in merit and repute betwixt a woman
which hath had several husbands in her life,—and there be plenty that
have had as many as three, four or even five, and another which in her
life shall have had but her husband and a lover, or two or three,—and I
have actually known some women continent and faithful to that degree?
As to this, I have heard a noble lady of the great world say she found
naught to choose betwixt a lady who had had several husbands, and
one that had had but a lover or so, along with her husband,—unless
it be that the marriage veil doth cover a multitude of sins. But in
point of sensuality and naughtiness, she said there was not a doit of
difference. Herein do they but illustrate the Spanish proverb, which
saith that _algunas mugeres son de natura de anguilas en retener, y de
lobas en excoger_,—“some women are like eels to hold, and she-wolves to
choose,” for that the eel is mighty slippery and ill to hold, and the
she-wolf doth alway choose the ugliest wolf for mate.

It befell me once at Court, as I have described elsewhere, that a lady
of a sufficiently exalted rank, which had been four times married, did
happen to tell me she had just been dining with her brother-in-law, and
I must guess who ’twas. This she said quite simply, without any thought
of roguishness; and I answered with a touch of waggery, yet laughing
the while: “Am I a diviner to guess such a riddle? You have been
married four times: I leave to the imagination how many brothers-in-law
you may have.” To this she retorted: “Nay! but you speak knavishly,”
and named me the particular brother-in-law. “Now you do talk sense,” I
said then; “before you were talking all at large.”

There was in old days at Rome[126] a lady which had had two and twenty
husbands one after other, and similarly a man which had had one and
twenty wives. The pair did hereupon bethink them to make a suitable
match by remarrying once more to each other. Eventually the husband
did outlive the wife; and was so highly honoured and esteemed at Rome
of all the people for this his noble victory, that like a successful
General, he was promenaded up and down in a triumphal car, crowned with
laurel and palm in hand. A splendid victory truly, and a well deserved
triumph!

In the days of King Henri II., there was at his Court a certain
Seigneur de Barbazan, Saint-Amand by surname, which did marry
thrice—three wives one after other. His third was daughter of Madame
de Monchy, governess to the Duchesse de Lorraine, who more doughty
than the other two, did quite surpass them, for he died under her. Now
whenas folk were mourning his loss at Court, and she in like wise was
inordinately afflicted at her bereavement, M. de Montpezat, a very
witty man, did rebuke all this demonstration, saying: that instead of
compassionating her, they should commend and extol her to the skies for
the victory she had gotten over her man, who was said to have been so
vigorous a wight and so strong and well provided that he had killed his
two first wives by dint of doing his devoir on them. But this lady, for
that she had not succumbed in the contest but had remained victorious,
should be highly praised and admired of all the Court for so glorious
a success,—a victory won over so valiant and robust a champion; and
that for the same cause herself had every reason to be proud. What a
victory, and what a source of pride, pardy!

I have heard the same doctrine cited a little above maintained also by
a great nobleman of France, who said: that he did find no difference
’twixt a woman that had had four or five husbands, as some have had,
and a whore which hath had three or four lovers one after other.
Similarly a gallant gentleman I wot of, having wedded a wife that had
been three times married already, one I also know by name, a man of
ready tongue and wit, did exclaim: “He hath married at last a whore
from the brothel of good name.” I’faith, women which do thus marry
again and again be like grasping surgeons, that will not at once bind
up the wounds of a poor wounded man, so as to prolong the cure and the
better to be gaining all the while their bits of fees. Nay! one dame of
this sort was used actually to say outright: “’Tis a poor thing to stop
dead in the very middle of one’s career; one is bound to finish, and go
on to the end!”

I do wonder that these women which be so hot and keen to marry again,
and at the same time so stricken in years, do not for their credit’s
sake make some use of cooling remedies and antiphlogistic potions,
so as to drive out all these heated humours. Yet so far be they from
any wish to use the like, as that they do employ the very opposite
treatment, declaring suchlike cooling boluses would ruin their stomach.
I have seen and read a little old-fashioned tract in Italian, but
a silly book withal, which did undertake to give recipes against
lasciviousness, and cited some two and thirty. But these be all so
silly I recommend not women to use them, nor to submit themselves to
any such annoying regimen. And so I have not thought good to copy them
in here. Pliny doth adduce one, which in former days the Vestal virgins
were used to employ; the Athenian dames did resort to the same remedy
during the festivals of the goddess Ceres, known as the _Thesmophoria_,
to cool their humours thereby and take away all hot appetite of
concupiscence. ’Twas to sleep on mattresses of the leaves of a tree
called the _agnus castus_. But be sure, an if during the feast they did
mortify themselves in this wise, after the same was over, they did very
soon pitch their mattresses to the winds.

I have seen a tree of the sort at a house in Guienne belonging to a
very high-born, honourable and beautiful lady. She would oft times show
the tree to strangers which came thither as a great rarity, and tell
them its peculiar property. But devil take me if ever I have seen or
heard tell of woman or dame that hath sent to gather one single branch,
or made the smallest scrap of mattress from its leaves. Certainly not
the lady that owned the said tree, who might have made what use she
pleased thereof. Truly, it had been a pity an if she had, and her
husband had not been best pleased; for so fair and charming a dame was
she, ’twas only right nature should be allowed her way, and she hath
borne to boot a noble line of offspring.


                                  10.

And to speak truth, suchlike harsh, chill medicines should be left to
poor nuns and prescribed to them only, which for all their fasting and
mortifying of the flesh, be oft times sore assailed, poor creatures,
with temptations of the flesh. An if only they had their freedom, they
would be ready enough, at least some would, to take like refreshment
with their more worldly sisters, and not seldom do they repent them
of their repentance. This is seen with the Roman courtesans, as to
one of whom I must tell a diverting tale. She was vowed to take the
veil, but before her going finally to the nunnery, a former lover of
hers, a gentleman of France, doth come to bid her farewell, ere she
entered the cloister forever. But before leaving her, he did ask one
more gratification of his passion, and she did grant the same, with
these words: _Fate dunque presto; ch’ adesso mi veranno cercar per
far mi monaca, e menare al monasterio_,—“Do it quick then, for they
be coming directly to make me a nun and carry me off to cloister.” We
must suppose she was fain to do it this once as a final treat, and
say with the Roman poet: _Tandem hæc olim meminisse juvabit_,—“’Twill
be good to remember in future days this last delight.” A strange
repentance insooth and a quaint novitiate! But truly when once they be
professed, at any rate the good-looking ones, (though of course there
be exceptions), I do believe they live more on the bitter herb of
repentance than any other bodily or spiritual sustenance.

Some however there be which do contrive a remedy for this state of
things, whether by dispensation or by sheer license they do take for
themselves. For in our lands they have no such dire treatment to fear
as the Romans in old days did mete out to their Vestal virgins which
had gone astray. This was verily hateful and abominable in its cruelty;
but then they were pagans and abounding in horrors and cruelties. On
the contrary we Christians, which do follow after the gentleness of our
Lord Christ, should be tender-hearted as he was, and forgiving as he
was forgiving. I would describe here in writing the fashion of their
punishment; but for very horror my pen doth refuse to indite the same.

Let us now leave these poor recluses, which I do verily believe, once
they be shut up in their nunneries, do endure no small hardship. So
a Spanish lady one time, seeing them setting to the religious life a
very fair and honourable damsel, did thus exclaim: _O tristezilla, y
en que pecasteis, que tan presto vienes à penitencia, y seis metida en
sepultura viva!_—“Poor creature, what so mighty sin have you done, that
you be so soon brought to penitence and thus buried alive!” And seeing
the nuns offering her every complaisance, compliment and welcome, she
said: _que todo le hedia, hasta el encienso de la yglesia_,—“that it
all stank in her nostrils, to the very incense in the church.”

Now as to these vows of virginity, Heliogabalus did promulgate a law to
the effect that no Roman maid, not even a Vestal virgin, was bound to
perpetual virginity, saying how that the female sex was over weak for
women to be bound to a pact they could never be sure of keeping. And
for this reason they that have founded hospitals for the nourishing,
rescuing and marrying poor girls, have done a very charitable work, no
less to enable these to taste the sweet fruit of marriage than to turn
them from naughtiness. So Panurge in Rabelais, did give much wealth of
his to make such marriages, and especially in the case of old and ugly
women, for with such was need of more expenditure of money than for the
pretty ones.

One question there is I would fain have resolved in all sincerity
and without concealment of any kind by some good lady that hath made
the journey,—to wit, when women be married a second time, how they
be affected toward the memory of their first husband. ’Tis a general
maxim hereanent, that later friendships and enmities do always make
the earlier ones forgot; in like wise will a second marriage bury the
thought of the first. As to this I will now give a diverting example,
though from an humble source,—not that it should therefore be void of
authority and to be rejected, if it be as they say, that albeit in an
obscure and common quarter, yet may wisdom and good intelligence be
hid there. A great lady of Poitou one day asking a peasant woman, a
tenant of hers, how many husbands she had had, and how she found them,
the latter, bobbing her little country curtsey, did coolly answer:
“I’ll tell you, Madam; I’ve had two husbands, praise the Lord! One was
called Guillaume, he was the first; and the second was called Collas.
Guillaume was a good man, easy in his circumstances, and did treat me
very well; but there, God have good mercy on Collas’ soul, for Collas
did his duty right well by me.” But she did actually say the word
straight out without any glozing or disguise such as I have thrown over
it. Prithee, consider how the naughty wench did pray God for the dead
man which was so good a mate and so lusty, and for what benefit, to
wit that he had covered her so doughtily; but of the first, never a
word of the sort. I should suppose many dames that do wed a second time
and a third do the same; for after all this is their chiefest reason
for marrying again, and he that doth play this game the best, is best
loved. Indeed they do always imagine the second husband must need be a
fierce performer,—though very oft they be sore deceived, not finding in
the shop the goods they did there think to find. Or else, if there be
some provision, ’tis oft so puny, wasted and worn, so slack, battered,
drooping and dilapidated, they do repent them ever they invested their
money in the bargain. Of this myself have seen many examples, that I
had rather not adduce.

We read in Plutarch how Cleomenes, having wedded the fair Agiatis, wife
of Agis, after the death of the latter, did grow fondly enamoured of
the same by reason of her surpassing beauty. He did not fail to note
the great sadness she lay under for her first husband’s loss; and felt
so great compassion for her, as that he made no grievance of the love
she still bare her former husband, and the affectionate memory she did
cherish of him. In fact, himself would often turn the discourse to her
earlier life, asking her facts and details as to the pleasures that had
erstwhile passed betwixt them twain. He had her not for long however,
for she soon died, to his extreme sorrow. ’Tis a thing not a few worthy
husbands do in the case of fair widows they have married.

But ’tis time now surely, methinks, to be making an end, if ever end is
to be made.

Other ladies there be which declare they do much better love their
second husbands than their first. “For as to our first husbands,”
some of these have told me, “these we do more often than not take at
the orders of our King or the Queen our mistress, or at the command of
our fathers, mothers, kinsmen, or guardians, not by our own unbiased
wish. On the other hand, once widowed and thus free and emancipated,
we do exercise such choice as seemeth us good, and take new mates
solely for our own good will and pleasure, for delight of love and the
satisfaction of our heart’s desire.” Of a surety there would seem to be
good reason here, were it not that very oft, as the old-time proverb
saith,—“Love that begins with a ring, oft ends with a halter.” So every
day do we see instances and examples where women thinking to be well
treated of their husbands, the which they have in some cases rescued
from justice and the gibbet, from poverty and misery and the hangman,
and saved alive, have been sore beaten, bullied, cruelly entreated and
often done to death of the same,—a just punishment of heaven for their
base ingratitude toward their former husbands, that were only too good
to them, and of whom they had never a good word to say.

These were in no way like one I have heard tell of, who the first night
of her marriage, when now her husband was beginning his assault, did
start sobbing and sighing very sore, so that at one and the same time
she was in two quite opposite states, cold and hot, winter and summer,
both at once. Her husband asking her what cause she had to be so sad,
and if he were not doing his devoir well, “Alas! too well, good sir!”
she made answer; “but I am thinking of mine other husband, which did
so earnestly pray me again and again never to marry afresh after his
death, but to bear in mind and have compassion on his young children.
Alackaday! I see plainly I shall have the like ado with you. Woe’s
me! what _shall_ I do? I do think, an if he can see me from the place
he now is in, he will be cursing me finely.” What an idea, never to
have thought on this afore, nor to have felt remorse but when ’twas
all too late! But the husband did soon appease her, and expel this
fancy by the best method possible; then next morning throwing wide the
chamber window, he did cast forth all memory of the former husband.
For is there not an old proverb which saith, “A woman that burieth one
husband, will think little of burying another,” and another, “There’s
more grimace than grief, when a woman loseth her husband.”

I knew another widow, a great lady, which was quite the opposite of
the last, and did not weep one whit the first night. For then, and the
second to boot, she did go so lustily to work with her second husband
as that they did break down and burst the bedstead, and this albeit she
had a kind of cancer on one breast. Yet notwithstanding her affliction,
she did miss never a point of amorous delight; and often afterward
would divert him with tales of the folly and ineptitude of her former
mate. And truly, by what I have heard sundry of either sex tell me,
the very last thing a second husband doth desire of his wife is to be
entertained with the merits and worth of her first, as though jealous
of the poor departed wight, who would like naught so well as to return
to earth again; but as for abuse of him, as much of that as ever you
please! Natheless there be not a few that will ask their wives about
their former lords, as did Cleomenes; but this they do, as feeling
themselves to be strong and vigorous; and so delighting to institute
comparisons, do cross-question them concerning the other’s sturdiness
and vigour in these sweet encounters. In like wise have I heard of
some which to put their bedfellows in better case, do lead them to
think their former mates were prentice hands compared with them, a
device that doth oft times answer their purpose well. Others again will
say just the opposite, and declare their first husbands were perfect
giants, so as to spur on their new mates to work like very pack mules.


                                  11.

Widows of the sort just described would be in good case in the island
of Chios,[127*] the fairest, sweetest and most pleasant of the Levant,
formerly possessed by the Genoese, but now for five and thirty years
usurped by the Turks,—a crying shame and loss for Christendom. Now in
this isle, as I am informed of sundry Genoese traders, ’tis the custom
that every woman desiring to continue a widow, without any intent to
marry again, is constrained to pay to the Seigneurie of the island a
certain fixed sum of money, which they call _argomoniatiquo_, which
is the same as saying (with all respect to the ladies), _an idle spot
is useless_. So likewise at Sparta, as Plutarch saith in his _Life of
Lysander_, was a fine established by law against such as would not
marry, or did marry over late, or ill. To return to Scio (Chios), I
have enquired of certain natives of that island, what might be the aim
and object of the said custom, which told me ’twas to the end the isle
might always be well peopled. I can vouch for this, that our land of
France will surely never be left desert or infertile by fault of our
widows’ not marrying again; for I ween there be more which do re-marry
than not, and will pay never a doit of tribute for idle and useless
females. And if not by marriage, at any rate in other ways, these
Chiotes do make that same organ work and fructify, as I will presently
show. ’Tis well too for our maids of France they need not to pay the
tax their sisters of Chios be liable to; for these, whether in country
or town, if they do come to lose their maidenhead before marriage, and
be fain after to continue the trade, be bound to pay once for all a
ducat (and surely ’tis a good bargain to compound for all their life
after at this price) to the Captain of the Night Watch, so as they
may pursue their business as they please, without let or hindrance.
And herein doth lie the chiefest and most certain profit this worthy
Captain doth come by in his office.

These dames and damsels of this Isle be much different from those of
olden days in the same land, which, by what Plutarch saith in his
_Opuscula_, were so chaste for seven hundred years, that never a case
was remembered where a married woman had done adultery, or a maid had
been deflowered unwed. A miracle! ’twill be said, a mythic tale worthy
of old Homer! At any rate be sure they be much other nowadays!

Never was a time when the Greeks had not always some device or other
making for wantonness. So in old times we read of a custom in the isle
of Cyprus, which ’tis said the kindly goddess Venus, the patroness of
that land, did introduce. This was that the maids of that island should
go forth and wander along the banks, shores and cliffs of the sea, for
to earn their marriage portions by the generous giving of their bodies
to mariners, sailors and seafarers along that coast. These would put
in to shore on purpose, very often indeed turning aside from their
straight course by compass to land there; and so taking their pleasant
refreshment with them, would pay handsomely, and presently hie them
away again to sea, for their part only too sorry to leave such good
entertainment behind. Thus would these fair maids win their marriage
dowers, some more, some less, some high, some low, some grand, some
lowly, according to the beauty, gifts and carnal attractions of each
damsel.

Nowadays ’tis different. No maids in any Christian nation do thus go
wandering forth, to expose them to wind and rain, cold and heat, sun
and moon, and so win their dower, for that the task is too laborious
for their delicate and tender skins and white complexions. Rather do
they have their lovers come to them under rich pavilions and gorgeous
hangings, and do there draw their amorous profit from their paramours,
without ever a tax to pay. I speak not now of the courtesans of Rome,
who do pay tax, but of women of higher place than they. In fact for
the most part for such damsels their fathers, mothers and brothers,
be not at much pains to gather money for their portion on marriage;
but on the contrary many of them be found able to give handsomely to
their kinsfolk, and advance the same in goods and offices, ranks and
dignities, as myself have seen in many instances.

For this cause did Lycurgus ordain in his Laws that virgins should be
wedded without money dowry, to the end men might marry them for their
merits, and not from greed. But, what kind of virtue was it? Why! on
their solemn feast-days the Spartan maids were used to sing and dance
in public stark naked with the lads, and even wrestle in the open
market-place,—the which however was done in all honesty and good faith,
so History saith. But what sort of honesty and purity was this, we may
well ask, to look on at these pretty maids so performing publicly?
Honesty was it never a whit, but pleasure in the sight of them, and
especially of their bodily movements and dancing postures, and above
all in their wrestling; and chiefest of all when they came to fall one
atop of the other, as they say in Latin, _illa sub, ille super_; _ille
sub et illa super_,—“she underneath, he atop; he underneath, she atop.”
You will never persuade me, ’twas all honesty and purity herein with
these Spartan maidens. I ween there is never chastity so chaste that
would not have been shaken thereby, or that, so making in public and
by day these feint assaults, they did not presently in privity and by
night and on assignation proceed to greater combats and night-attacks.
And no doubt all this might well be done, seeing how the said Lycurgus
did suffer such men as were handsome and well grown to borrow other
citizens’ wives to sow seed therein as in a good and fruitful soil. So
was it in no wise blameworthy for an old outwearied husband to lend his
young and beautiful wife to some gallant youth he did choose therefor.
Nay! the lawgiver did pronounce it permissible for the wife herself to
choose for to help her procreation the next kinsman of her husband,
then an if he pleased her fancy, to couple with him, to the end the
children they might engender should at least be of the blood and race
of the husband. Indeed there is some sense in the practice, and had not
the Jews likewise the same law of license betwixt sister-in-law and
brother-in-law? On the other hand our Christian law hath reformed all
this, albeit our Holy Father hath in divers cases granted dispensations
founded on divers reasons. In Spain ’tis a practice much adopted, but
never without dispensation.

Well! to say something more, and as soberly as we may, of some other
sorts of widows,—and then an end.

One sort there is, widows which do absolutely refuse to marry again,
hating wedlock like the plague. So one, a lady of a great house and a
witty woman withal, when that I asked her if she were not minded to
make her vow once again to the god Hymen, did reply: “Tell me this,
by’r lady; suppose a galley-slave or captive to have tugged years
long at the oar, tied to the chain, and at last to have got back his
freedom, would he not be a fool and a very imbecile, an if he did not
hie him away with a good heart, determined never more to be subject
to the orders of a savage corsair? So I, after being in slavery to an
husband, an if I should take a fresh master, what should I deserve to
get, prithee, since without resorting to that extreme, and with no
risk at all, I can have the best of good times?” Another great lady,
and a kinswoman of mine own, on my asking her if she had no wish to
wed again, replied: “Never a bit, coz, but only to bed again,” playing
on the words _wed_ and _bed_, and signifying she would be glad enough
to give herself some treat, but without intervention of any second
husband,—according to the old proverb which saith, “A safer fling unwed
than wed.” Another saying hath it, that women be always good hostesses,
in love as elsewhere; and a right saying ’tis, for they be mistresses
of the situation, and queens wherever they be,—that is the pretty ones
be so.

I have heard tell of another, which was asked of a gentleman which
was fain to try his ground as a suitor for her hand, an if she would
not like an husband. “Nay! sir,” she answered, “never talk to me of
an husband, I’ll have no more of them; but for a lover, I’m not so
sure.”—“Then, Madame, prithee, let me be that lover, since husband I
may not be.” Her reply was, “Court me well, and persevere; mayhap you
will succeed.”

A fair and honourable widow lady, of some thirty summers, one day
wishing to break a jest with an honourable gentleman, or to tell truth,
to provoke him to love-making, and having as she was about to mount her
horse caught the front of her mantle on something and torn it somewhat
in detaching it, taking it up said to him: “Look you, what you have
done, so and so” (accosting him by his name); “you have ripped my
front.”

“I should be right sorry to hurt it, Madam; ’tis too sweet and pretty
for that.”

“Why! what know you of it?” she replied; “you have never seen it.”

“What! can you deny,” retorted the other, “that I have seen it an
hundred times over, when you were a little lassie?”

“Ah! but,” said she, “I was then but a stripling, and knew not yet what
was what.”

“Still, I suppose ’tis yet in the same place as of old, and hath not
changed position. I ween I could even now find it in the same spot.”

“Oh, yes! ’tis there still, albeit mine husband hath rolled it and
turned it about, more than ever did Diogenes with his tub.”

“Yes! and nowadays how doth it do without movement?”

“’Tis for all the world like a clock that is left unwound.”

“Then take you heed, lest that befall you that doth happen to clocks
when they be not wound up, and continue so for long; their springs do
rust by lapse of time, and they be good for naught after.”

“’Tis not a fair comparison,” said she, “for that the springs of the
clock you mean be not liable to rust at all, but keep in good order,
wound or unwound, always ready to be set a-going at any time.”

“Please God,” cried the gentleman, “whenas the time for winding come, I
might be the watchmaker to wind it up!”

“Well, well!” returned the lady, “when that day and festive hour shall
arrive, we will not be idle, but will do a right good day’s work. So
God guard from ill him I love not as well as you.”

After this keen and heart pricking interchange of wit, the lady did
mount her horse, after kissing the gentleman with much good-will,
adding as she rode away, “Goodbye, till we meet again, and enjoy our
little treat!”

But alas! as ill fate would have it, the fair lady did die within
six weeks whereat her lover did well nigh die of chagrin. For these
enticing words, with others she had said afore, had so heartened him
with good hope that he was assured of her conquest, as indeed she was
ready enough to be his. A malison on her untimely end, for verily she
was one of the best and fairest dames you could see anywhere, and well
worth a venial fault to possess,—or even a mortal sin!

Another fair young widow was asked by an honourable gentleman if she
did keep Lent, and abstain from eating meat, as folks do then. “No!”
she said, “I do not.”—“So I have observed,” returned the gentleman;
“I have noted you made no scruple, but did eat meat at that season
just as at any other, both raw and cooked.”—“That was at the time mine
husband was alive; now I am a widow, I have reformed and regulated my
living more seemly.”—“Nay! beware,” then said the other, “of fasting
so strictly, for it doth readily happen to such as go fasting and
anhungered, that anon, when the desire of meat cometh on them, they do
find their vessels so narrow and contracted, as that they do thereby
suffer much incommodity.”—“Nay! that vessel of my body,” said the
lady, “that you mean, is by no means so narrow or hunger-pinched, but
that, when mine appetite shall revive, I may not afford it good and
sufficient refreshment.”

I knew another great lady, which all through her unmarried and married
life was in all men’s mouths by reason of her exceeding stoutness.
Afterward she came to lose her husband, and did mourn him with so
extreme a sorrow that she grew as dry as wood.[128] Yet did she never
cease to indulge her in the joys of former days, even going so far as
to borrow the aid of a certain Secretary she had, and of other such
to boot, and even of her cook, so ’twas reported. For all that, she
did not win back her flesh, albeit the said cook, who was all fat and
greasy, ought surely, I ween, to have made her fat. So she went on,
taking now one, now another of her serving-men, all the while playing
the part of the most prudish and virtuous dame in all the Court, with
pious phrases ever on her lips, and naught but scandal against all
other women, and never a word of good for any of them. Of like sort was
that noble woman of Dauphiné, in the _Cent Nouvelles_ of the Queen
of Navarre, which was found lying flat on the grass with her groom or
muleteer by a certain gentleman, that was ready to die of love for her
but this sight did quick cure his love sickness for him.

I have heard speak of a very beautiful woman at Naples, which had the
repute of going in like manner with a Moor, the ugliest fellow in the
world, who was her slave and groom, but something made her love him.


                                  12.

I have read in an old Romance, _Jehan de Saintré_, printed in black
letter, how the late King John of France did rear the hero Jehan as his
page. Now by custom of former days, great folk were used to send their
pages to carry messages, as is done likewise to-day. But then they were
wont to go everywhere, and up and down the countryside, a-horseback;
I have even heard our fathers say they were not seldom sent on minor
embassies, for by despatching a page and horse and a broad piece,
the thing was done and so much expense well spared. This same little
Jehan de Saintré (for so he did long continue to be called)[129*] was
very much loved of his master the King, for that he was full of wit
and intelligence, and was often sent to carry trifling messages to
his sister, who was at the time a widow,—though the book saith not
whose widow. This great lady did fall enamoured of the lad, after he
had been several times on errands to her; so one day, finding a good
opportunity and no one nigh, she did question him, asking him an if he
did not love some lady or other at Court, and which of them all liked
him best. This is a way a great many ladies have, whenas they be fain
to score the first point and deliver their first attack on one they
fancy, as myself have seen done. Well! little Jehan de Saintré, who
had never so much as dreamed of love, told her, “No! not yet,” going
on to describe several Court ladies, and what he thought of them. Then
did she hold forth to him on the beauties and delights of love, but he
only answered, “Nay! I care less than ever for’t.” For in those old
days, even as to-day, some of our greatest ladies were slaves to love
and much subject to detraction; for indeed folk so adroit as they have
grown since, and ’twas only the cleverest that had the good fortune
to impose on their husbands and pass as good women by virtue of their
hypocrisies and little wiles. The lady then, seeing the lad to be
well-favoured, goes on to tell him how she would give him a mistress
that would love him well, provided he was a true lover to her, making
him promise under pain of instant shame and disgrace, that above all he
should be sure and secret. Eventually she did make her avowal to him,
and tell him herself would fain be his lady and darling,—for in those
days the word _mistress_ was not as yet in vogue. At this the young
page was sore astonished, thinking she did but make a mock of him, or
wished to trap him and get him a whipping.

However she did very soon show so many unequivocal signs of fire and
heat of love and such tender familiarities, as that he perceived ’twas
no mockery; while she kept on telling him she would train and form
him and make him a great man. The end was their loves and mutual joys
did last a long while, during his pagehood and after he was no more a
page, till at the last he had to depart on a distant journey,—when she
did change him for a great, fat Abbé. This is the tale we find in the
_Nouvelles du monde advantureux_, writ by a gentleman of the chamber
to the Queen of Navarre, wherein we see the Abbé put an affront on the
said Jehan de Saintré, that was so brave and valiant; yet did he in no
long while pay the worthy Abbé back in good coin and three times over.
’Tis an excellent Tale, and cometh from the book I have named.[130*]

Here we see how ’tis not only of to-day that fair ladies do love pages,
above all when they be gay and speckled like partridges. And verily,
what creatures women be!—that be ready enough to have lovers galore,
but husbands not! This they do for the love of freedom, which is indeed
a noble thing. For they think, when once they be out of their husband’s
rule, they are in Paradise, having their fine dower and spending it
themselves, managing all the household, and handling the coin. All
goeth through their hands; and instead of being servants, they be now
mistresses, and do make free choice of their pleasures, and such as do
best minister to the same.

Others again there be, which do surely hate the notion of making a
second marriage, from distaste to lose their rank and dignity, their
goods, riches and honours, their soft and luxurious living, and for
this cause do restrain their passions. So have I known and heard
speak of not a few great dames and Princesses, which from mere dread
of their failing to find again the grandeurs of their first match,
and so losing rank, would never marry again. Not that they did cease
therefor one whit to follow after love and turn the same to their joy
and delight,—yet all the while never losing their rank and dignity,
their stools of state and honourable seats in Queens’ chambers and
elsewhere. Lucky women, to enjoy their grandeur and mount high,
yet abase them low, at one and the same time! But to say a word of
reproach or remonstrance to them, never dream no such thing! Else no
end would there be of anger and annoyance, denials and protestations,
contradiction and revenge.

I have heard a tale told of a widow lady, and indeed I knew her
myself, which had long enjoyed the love of an honourable gentleman,
under pretext she would marry him; but he did in no wise make himself
obtrusive. A great Princess, the lady’s mistress, was for reproaching
her for her conduct. But she, wily and corrupt, did answer her:
“Nay! Madam, but should it be denied us to love with an honourable
love? surely that were too cruel.” Only God knoweth, this love she
called honourable, was really a most lecherous passion. And verily
all loves be so; they be born all pure, chaste and honourable, but
anon do lose their maidenhead, so to speak, and by magic influence of
some philosopher’s stone, be transformed into base metal, and grow
dishonourable and lecherous.

The late M. de Bussy, who was one of the wittiest talkers of his time,
and no less pleasing as a story-teller, one day at Court seeing a
great lady, a widow, and of ripe years, who did still persist in her
amorous doings, did exclaim: “What! doth this hackney yet frequent the
stallion?” The word was repeated to the lady, which did vow mortal hate
against the offender. On M. de Bussy’s learning this, “Well, well!” he
said, “I know how to make my peace, and put this all right. Prithee,
go tell her I said not so, but that this is what I really said, ‘Doth
this _filly_[131] yet go to be mounted? For sure I am she is not wroth
because I take her for a light o’ love, but for an old woman; and when
she hears I called her filly, that is to say a young mare, she will
suppose I do still esteem her a young woman.’” And so it was; for the
lady, on hearing this change and improvement in the wording, did relax
her anger and made it up with M. de Bussy; whereat we did all have a
good laugh. Yet for all she might do, she was always deemed an old,
half-foundered jade, that aged as she was, still went whinnying after
the male.

This last was quite unlike another lady I have also heard tell of, who
having been a merry wench in her earlier days, but getting well on in
years, did set her to serve God with fast and prayer. An honourable
gentleman remonstrating and asking her wherefore she did make such
long vigils at Church and such severe fasts at table, and if it were
not to vanquish and deaden the stings of the flesh, “Alas!” said she,
“these be all over and done with for me.” These words she did pronounce
as piteously as ever spake Milo of Croton, that strong and stalwart
wrestler of old, (I have told the tale elsewhere, methinks), who having
one day gone down into the arena, or wrestlers’ ring, but only for to
view the game, for he was now grown very old, one of the band coming
up to him did ask, an if he would not try yet a fall of the old sort.
But he, baring his arms and right sadly turning back his sleeves, said
only, gazing the while at his muscles and sinews: “Alas! they be dead
now.”

Another like incident did happen to a gentleman I wot of, similar to
the tale I have just told of M. de Bussy. Coming to Court, after an
absence of six months, he there beheld a lady which was used to attend
the academy, lately introduced at Court by the late King. “Why!”
saith he, “doth the academy then still exist? I was told it had been
abolished.”—“Can you doubt,” a courtier answered him, “her attendance?
Why! her master is teaching her philosophy, which doth speak and treat
of perpetual motion.” And in good sooth, for all the beating of brains
these same philosophers do undergo, to discover perpetual motion, yet
is there none more surely so than the motion Venus doth teach in _her_
school.

A lady of the great world did give even a better answer of another,
whose beauty they were extolling highly, only that her eyes did ever
remain motionless, she never turning the same one way or the other. “We
must suppose,” she said, “all her care doth go to move other portions
of her body, and so hath she none to spare for her eyes.”

However, an if I would put down in writing all the witty words and
good stories I know, to fill out my matter, I should never get me
done. And so, seeing I have other subjects to attack, I will desist,
and finish with this saying of Boccaccio, already cited above, namely,
that women, maids, wives and widows alike, at least the most part of
them, be one and all inclined to love. I have no thought to speak of
common folk, whether in country or in town, for such was never mine
intention in writing, but only of well-born persons, in whose service
my pen is aye ready to run nimbly. But for mine own part, if I were
asked my true opinion, I should say emphatically there is naught like
married women, all risk and peril on their husbands’ side apart, for
to win good enjoyment of love withal, and to taste quick the very
essence of its delights. The fact is their husbands do heat them so,
they be like a furnace, continually poked and stirred, that asks naught
but fuel, water and wood or charcoal to keep up its heat for ever. And
truly he that would have a good light, must always be putting more oil
in the lamp. At the same time let him beware of a foul stroke, and
those ambushes of jealous husbands wherein the wiliest be oft times
caught![132*]

Yet is a man bound to go as circumspectly as he may, and as boldly
to boot, and do like the great King Henri, who was much devoted to
love, but at the same time exceeding respectful toward ladies, and
discreet, and for these reasons much loved and well received of them.
Now whenever it fell out that this monarch was changing night quarters
and going to sleep in the bed of a new mistress, which expecting him,
he would never go thither (as I learn on very good authority) but by
the secret galleries of Saint-Germain, Blois or Fontainebleau, and
the little stealthy back-stairs, recesses and garrets of his castles.
First went his favourite valet of the chamber, Griffon by name, which
did carry his boar-spear before him along with the torch, and the King
next, his great cloak held before his face or else his night-gown,
and his sword under his arm. Presently, being to bed with the lady,
he would aye have his spear and sword put by the bed’s-head, the door
well shut, and Griffon guarding it, watching and sleeping by turns.
Now I leave it to you, an if a great King did give such heed to his
safety (for indeed there have been some caught, both kings and great
princes,—for instance the Duc de Fleurance Alexandre in our day),
what smaller folks should do, following the example of this powerful
monarch. Yet there are to be found proud souls which do disdain all
precaution; and of a truth they be often trapped for their pains.

I have heard a tale related of King Francis, how having a fair lady
as mistress,[133*] a connection that had long subsisted betwixt them,
and going one day unexpectedly to see the said lady, and to sleep with
her at an unusual hour, ’gan knock loudly on the door, as he had both
right and might to do, being the master. She, who was at the moment in
company of the Sieur de Bonnivet, durst not give the reply usual with
the Roman courtesans under like circumstances, _Non si puo, la signora
è accompagnata_,—“You cannot come in; Madam has company with her.” In
this case the only thing to do was to devise quick where her gallant
could be most securely hid. By good luck ’twas summer time, so they had
put an heap of branches and leaves in the fire-place, as the custom is
in France. Accordingly she did counsel and advise him to make at once
for the fire-place, and there hide him among the leafage, all in his
shirt as he was,—and ’twas a fortunate thing for him it was not winter.
After the King had done his business with the lady, he was fain to
make water; so getting up from the bed, he went to the fire-place to
do so, for lack of other convenience. And so sore did he want to, that
he did drown the poor lover worse than if a bucket of water had been
emptied over him, for he did water him thoroughly, as with a garden
watering-pot, all round and about, and even over the face, eyes, nose,
mouth and everywhere; albeit by tight shut lips he may have escaped all
but a drop or so in his chops. I leave you to fancy what a sorry state
the poor gentleman was in, for he durst not move, and what a picture
of patience and grim endurance he did present! The King having done,
withdrew, and bidding his mistress farewell, left the chamber. The lady
had the door immediately shut behind him, and calling her lover into
her, did warm the poor man, giving him a clean shift to put on. Nor was
it without some fun and laughter, after the fright they had had; for
an if he had been discovered, both he and she had been in very serious
peril.

’Twas the same lady, which being deep in love with this M. de Bonnivet,
and desiring to convince the King of the contrary, for that he had
conceived some touch of jealousy on the subject, would say thus to him:
“Oh! but he’s diverting, that Sieur de Bonnivet, who thinks himself so
handsome! and the more I tell him he is a pretty fellow, the more he
doth believe it. ’Tis my great pastime, making fun of the man, for he’s
really witty and ready-tongued, and no one can help laughing in his
company, such clever retorts doth he make.” By these words she was for
persuading the King that her common discourse with Bonnivet had naught
to do with love and alliance, or playing his Majesty false in any wise.
How many fair dames there be which do practise the like wiles, and to
cloak the intrigues they are pursuing with some lover, do speak ill
of him, and make fun of him before the world, though in private they
soon drop this fine pretense; and this is what they call cunning and
contrivance in love.

I knew a very great lady,[134*] who one day seeing her daughter, which
was one of the fairest of women, grieving for the love of a certain
gentleman, with whom her brother was sore angered, did say this to
her amongst other things: “Nay! my child, never love that man. His
manners and form be so bad, and he’s such an ugly fellow. He’s for all
the world like a village pastry cook!” At this the daughter burst out
a-laughing, making merry at his expense and applauding her mother’s
description, allowing his likeness to a pastry-cook, red cap and all.
For all that, she had her way; but some while after, in another six
months that is, she did leave him for another man.

I have known not a few ladies which had no words bad enough to cast
at women that loved inferiors,—their secretaries, serving-men and
the like low-born persons, declaring publicly they did loathe such
intrigues worse than poison. Yet would these very same ladies be
giving themselves up to these base pleasures as much as any. Such
be the cunning ways of women; before the world they do show fierce
indignation against these offenders, and do threaten and abuse them;
but all the while behind backs they do readily enough indulge the same
vice themselves. So full of wiles are they! for as the Spanish proverb
saith, _Mucho sabe la zorra; mas sabe mas la dama enamorada_,—“The fox
knoweth much, but a woman in love knoweth more.”


                                  13.

However, for all this fair lady of the tale told above did to lull King
Francis’ anxiety, yet did she not drive forth every grain of suspicion
from out his head, as I have reason to know. I do remember me how once,
making a visit to Chambord to see the castle, an old porter that was
there, who had been body servant to King Francis, did receive me very
obligingly. For in his earlier days he had known some of my people both
at Court and in the field, and was of his own wish anxious to show me
everything. So having led me to the King’s bed-chamber, he did show
me a phrase of writing by the side of the window on the left hand.
“Look, Sir!” he cried, “read yonder words. If you have never seen the
hand-writing of the King, mine old master, there it is.” And reading
it, we found this phrase, “_Toute femme varie_,” writ there in large
letters. I had with me a very honourable and very able gentleman of
Périgord, my friend, by name M. des Roches, to whom I turned and said
quickly: “’Tis to be supposed, some of the ladies he did love best,
and of whose fidelity he was most assured, had been found of him to
_vary_ and play him false. Doubtless he had discovered some change in
them that was scarce to his liking, and so, in despite, did write these
words.” The porter overhearing us, put in: “Why! surely, surely! make
no mistake, for of all the fair dames I have seen and known, never a
one but did cry off on a false scent worse than ever his hunting pack
did in chasing the stag; yet ’twas with a very subdued voice, for an if
he had noted it, he would have brought ’em to the scent again pretty
smartly.”

They were, ’twould seem, of those women, which can never be content
with either their husbands or their lovers, Kings though they be, and
Princes and great Lords; but must be ever chopping and changing. Such
this good King had found them by experience to be, having himself first
debauched the same and taken them from the charge of their husbands or
their mothers, tempting them from their maiden or widowed estate.

I have both known and heard speak of a lady,[135*] so fondly loved
of her Prince, as that for the mighty affection he bare her, he did
plunge her to the neck in all sorts of favours, benefits and honours,
and never another woman was to be compared with her for good fortune.
Natheless was she so enamoured of a certain Lord, she would never quit
him. Then whenas he would remonstrate and declare to her how the Prince
would ruin both of them, “Nay! ’tis all one,” she would answer; “an if
you leave me, I shall ruin myself, for to ruin you along with me. I had
rather be called your concubine than this Prince’s mistress.” Here you
have woman’s caprice surely, and wanton naughtiness to boot! Another
very great lady I have known, a widow, did much the same; for albeit
she was all but adored of a very great nobleman, yet must she needs
have sundry other humbler lovers, so as never to lose an hour of her
time or ever be idle. For indeed one man only cannot be always at work
and afford enough in these matters; and the rule of love is this, that
a passionate woman is not for one stated time, nor yet for one stated
person alone, nor will confine her to one passion,—reminding me of that
dame in the _Cent Nouvelles_ of the Queen of Navarre, which had three
lovers all at once, and was so clever she did contrive to manage them
all three most adroitly.

The beautiful Agnes Sorel, the adored mistress of King Charles VII.,
was suspected by him of having borne a daughter that he thought not to
be his, nor was he ever able to recognize her. And indeed, like mother,
like daughter, was the word, as our Chroniclers do all agree. The same
again did Anne Boleyn, wife of King Henry VIII. of England, whom he did
behead for not being content with him, but giving herself to adultery.
Yet had he chose her for her beauty, and did adore her fondly.

I knew another lady which had been loved by a very honourable
gentleman, but after some while left by him; and one day it happened
that these twain fell to discussing their former loves. The gentleman,
who was for posing as a dashing blade, cried, “Ha! ha! and think you,
you were my only mistress in those days? You will be much surprised
to hear, I had two others all the while, would you not?” To this she
answered on the instant, “You would be yet more surprised, would you
not? to learn you were anything but mine only lover then, for I had
actually three beside you to fall back on.” Thus you see how a good
ship will always have two or three anchors for to ensure its safety
thoroughly.

To conclude,—love is all in all for women, and so it should be! I will
only add how once I found in the tablets of a very fair and honourable
lady which did stammer a little Spanish, but did understand the same
language well enough, this little maxim writ with her own hand, for
I did recognize it quite easily: _Hembra o dama sin compagnero,
esperanza sin trabajo, y navio sin timon; nunca pueden hazer cost que
sea buena_,—“Man or woman without companion, hope without work, or
ship without rudder, will never do aught good for much.” ’Tis a saying
equally true for wife, widow and maid; neither one nor the other can
do aught good without the company of a man, while the hope a lover
hath of winning them is not by itself near so like to gain them over
readily as with something of pains and hard work added, and some strife
and struggle. Yet doth not either wife or widow give so much as a maid
must, for ’tis allowed of all to be an easier and simpler thing to
conquer and bring under one that hath already been conquered, subdued
and overthrown, than one that hath never yet been vanquished,—and that
far less toil and pains is spent in travelling a road already well worn
and beaten than one that hath never been made and traced out,—and for
the truth of these two instances I do refer me to travellers and men of
war. And so it is with maids; indeed there be even some so capricious
as that they have always refused to marry, choosing rather to live
ever in maidenly estate. But an if you ask them the reason, “’Tis so,
because my humour is to have it so,” they declare. Cybelé, Juno, Venus,
Thetis, Ceres and other heavenly goddesses, did all scorn this name
of virgin,—excepting only Pallas, which did spring from her father
Jupiter’s brain, hereby showing that virginity is naught but a notion
conceived in the brain. So, ask our maids, which will never marry, or
an if they do, do so as late as ever they can, and at an over ripe age,
why they marry not, “’Tis because I do not wish,” they say; “such is my
humour and my notion.”

Several such we have seen at the Court of our Princes in the days
of King Francis. The Queen Regent had a very fair and noble maid of
honour, named Poupincourt,[136*] which did never marry, but died a maid
at the age of sixty, as chaste as when she was born, for she was most
discreet. La Brelandière again died a maid and virgin at the ripe age
of eighty, the same which was governess of Madame d’Angoulême as a girl.

I knew another maid of honour of very great and exalted family, and
at the time seventy years of age, which would never marry,—albeit she
was no wise averse to love without marriage. Some that would fain
excuse her for that she would not marry, used to aver she was meet to
be no husband’s wife, seeing she had no affair at all. God knoweth the
truth! but at any rate she did find a good enough one to have good fun
elsewhere withal. A pretty excuse truly!

Mademoiselle de Charansonnet, of Savoy, died at Tours lately, a maid,
and was interred with her hat and her white virginal robe, very
solemnly, with much pomp, stateliness and good company, at the age of
forty-five or over. Nor must we doubt in her case, ’twas any defect
which stood in the way, for she was one of the fairest, most honourable
and most discreet ladies of the Court, and myself have known her to
refuse very excellent and very high-born suitors.

Mine own sister, Mademoiselle de Bourdeille, which is at Court maid of
honour of the present Queen, hath in like wise refused very excellent
offers, and hath never consented to marry, nor never will. So firm
resolved is she and obstinate to live and die a maid, no matter to
what age she may attain; and indeed so far she hath kept steady to her
purpose, and is already well advanced in years.

Mademoiselle de Certan,[137*] another of the Queen’s maids of honour,
is of the same humour, as also Mademoiselle de Surgières, the most
learned lady of the Court, and therefore known as _Minerva_,—and not a
few others.

The Infanta of Portugal, daughter of the late Queen Eleanor, I have
seen of the same resolved mind; and she did die a maid and virgin at
the age of sixty or over. This was sure from no want of high birth, for
she was well born in every way, nor of wealth, for she had plenty, and
above all in France, where General Gourgues did manage her affairs to
much advantage, nor yet of natural gifts, for I did see her at Lisbon,
at the age of five and forty, a very handsome and charming woman, of
good and graceful appearance, gentle, agreeable, and well deserving
an husband her match in all things, in courtesy and the qualities we
French do most possess. I can affirm this, from having had the honour
of speaking with this Princess often and familiarly.

The late Grand Prior of Lorraine, when he did bring his galleys from
East to West of the Mediterranean Sea on his voyage to Scotland, in
the time of the minority of King Francis II., passing by Lisbon and
tarrying there some days, did visit and see her every day. She did
receive him most courteously and took great delight in his company,
loading him with fine presents. Amongst others, she gave him a chain
to suspend his cross withal, all of diamonds and rubies and great
pearls, well and richly worked; and it might be worth from four to
five thousand crowns, going thrice round his neck. I think it might
well be worth that sum, for he could always pawn it for three thousand
crowns, as he did one time in London, when we were on our way back from
Scotland. But no sooner was he returned to France than he did send to
get it out again, for he did love it for the sake of the lady, with
whom he was no little captivated and taken. And I do believe she was
no less fond of him, and would willingly have unloosed her maiden knot
for him,—that is by way of marriage, for she was a most discreet and
virtuous Princess. I will say more, and that is, that but for the early
troubles that did arise in France, into the which his brothers did draw
him and kept him engaged therein, he would himself have brought his
galleys back and returned the same road, for to visit this Princess
again and speak of wedlock with her. And I ween he would in that case
have hardly been shown the door, for he was of as good an house as
she, and descended of great Kings no less than she, and above all was
one of the handsomest, most agreeable, honourable and best Princes of
Christendom. Now for his brothers, in particular the two eldest, for
these were the oracles of the rest and captains of the ship, I did one
day behold them and him conversing of the matter, the Cardinal telling
them of his voyage and the pleasures and favours he had received at
Lisbon. They were much in favour of his making the voyage once more and
going back thither again, advising him to pursue his advantage in that
quarter, as the Pope would at once have given him dispensation of his
religious orders. And but for those accursed troubles I have spoke of,
he would have gone, and in mine opinion the emprise had turned out to
his honour and satisfaction. The said Princess did like him well, and
spake to me of him very fondly, asking me as to his death,—quite like a
woman in love, a thing easily enough perceived in such circumstances by
a man of a little penetration.

I have heard yet another reason alleged by a very clever person, I say
not whether maid or wife,—and she had mayhap had experience of the
truth thereof,—why some women be so slow to marry. They declare this
tardiness cometh _propter mollitiem_, “by reason of luxuriousness.”
Now this word _mollities_ doth mean, they be so luxurious, that is to
say so much lovers of their own selves and so careful to have tender
delight and pleasure by themselves and in themselves, or mayhap with
their bosom friends, after the Lesbian fashion, and do find such
gratification in female society alone, as that they be convinced and
firmly persuaded that with men they would never win such satisfaction.
Wherefore they be content to go without these altogether in their
joys and toothsome pleasures, without ever a thought of masculine
acquaintance or marriage.

Maids and virgins would seem in old days at Rome to have been highly
honoured and privileged, so much so that the law had no jurisdiction
over them to sentence them to death. Hence the story we read of a
Roman Senator in the time of the Triumvirate, which was condemned to
die among other victims of the Proscription, and not he alone, but all
the offspring of his loins. So when a daughter of his house did appear
on the scaffold, a very fair and lovely girl, but of unripe years and
yet virgin, ’twas needful for the executioner to deflower her himself
and take her maidenhead on the scaffold, and only then when she was so
polluted, could he ply his knife upon her. The Emperor Tiberius did
delight in having fair virgins thus publicly deflowered, and then put
to death,—a right villainous piece of cruelty, pardy!

The Vestal Virgins in like manner were greatly honoured and respected,
no less for their virginity than for their religious character; for
indeed, an if they did show any the smallest frailty of bodily purity,
they were an hundred times more rigorously punished than when they had
failed to take good heed of the sacred fire, and were buried alive
under the most pitiful and terrible circumstances. ’Tis writ of one
Albinus, a Roman gentleman, that having met outside Rome some Vestals
that were going somewhither a-foot, he did command his wife and
children to descend from her chariot, to set them in it and so complete
their journey. Moreover they had such weight and authority, as that
very often they were trusted as umpires to make peace betwixt the Roman
people and the Knights, when troubles did sometimes arise affecting
the two orders. The Emperor Theodosius did expel them from Rome under
advice of the Christians; but in opposition to the said Emperor the
Romans did presently depute one Symmachus, to beseech him to restore
them again, with all their wealth, incomings and privileges as before.
These were exceedingly great, and indeed every day they were used to
distribute so great a store of alms, as that neither native Roman nor
stranger, coming or going, was ever suffered to ask an alms, so copious
was their pious charity toward all poor folk. Yet would Theodosius
never agree to bring them back again.

They were named Vestals from the Latin word _vesta_, signifying fire,
the which may well turn and twist, shoot and sparkle, yet doth it
never cast seed, nor receive the same,—and so ’tis with a virgin. They
were bound so to remain virgins for thirty years, after which they
might marry; but few of them were fortunate in so leaving their first
estate, just like our own nuns which have cast off the veil and quitted
the religious habit. They kept much state and went very sumptuously
dressed,—of all which the poet Prudentius doth give a pleasing
description, being apparently much in the condition of our present
Lady Canonesses of Mons in Hainault and Réaumond in Lorraine, which be
permitted to marry after. Moreover this same Prudentius doth greatly
blame them because they were used to go abroad in the city in most
magnificent coaches, correspondingly attired, and to the Amphitheatres
to see the games of the Gladiators and combats to the death betwixt men
and men, and men and wild beasts, as though finding much delight in
seeing folk thus kill each other and shed blood. Wherefore he doth pray
the Emperor to abolish these sanguinary contests and pitiful spectacles
altogether. The Vestals at any rate should never behold suchlike
barbarous sports; though indeed they might say for their part: “For
lack of other more agreeable sports, the which other women do see and
practise, we must needs content us with these.”

As for the estate of widows in many cases, there be many which do love
just as soberly as these Vestals, and myself have known several such;
but others again would far fainer take their joy in secret with men,
and in the fullness of complete liberty, rather than subject to them
in the bonds of marriage. For this reason, when we do see women long
preserve their widowhood, ’tis best not over much to praise them as we
might be inclined to do, till we do know their mode of life, and then
only, according to what we have learned thereof, either to extol them
most highly or scorn them. For a woman, when she is fain to unbend her
severity, as the phrase is, is terribly wily, and will bring her man
to a pretty market, an if he take not good heed. And being so full of
guile, she doth well understand how to bewitch and bedazzle the eyes
and wits of men in such wise they can scarce possibly recognize the
real life they lead. For such or such an one they will mistake for a
perfect prude and model of virtue, which all the while is a downright
harlot, but doth play her game so cunningly and furtively none can ever
discover aught.

I have known a great Lady in my time, which did remain a widow more
than forty years, so acting all the while as to be esteemed the most
respectable woman in country or Court, yet was she _sotto coverto_
(under the rose) a regular, downright harlot. So featly had she
followed the trade by the space of five and fifty years, as maid, wife
and widow, that scarce a suspicion had she roused against her at the
age of seventy, when she died. She did get full value of her privileges
as a woman; one time, when a young widow, she fell in love with a
certain young nobleman, and not able otherwise to get him, she did come
one Holy Innocents’ day into his bed-chamber, to give him the usual
greetings. But the young man gave her these readily enough, and with
something else than the customary instrument. She had her dose,—and
many another like it afterward.[138*]

Another widow I have known, which did keep her widowed estate for fifty
years, all the while wantoning it right gallantly, but always with the
most prudish modesty of mien, and many lovers at divers times. At the
last, coming to die, one she had loved for twelve long years, and had
had a son of him in secret, of this man she did make so small account
she disowned him completely. Is not this a case where my word is
illustrated, that we should never commend widows over much, unless we
know thoroughly their life and life’s end?

But at this rate I should never end; and an end we must have. I am well
aware sundry will tell me I have left out many a witty word and merry
tale which might have still better embellished and ennobled this my
subject. I do well believe it; but an if I had gone on so from now to
the end of the world, I should never have made an end; however if any
be willing to take the trouble to do better, I shall be under great
obligation to the same.

                   *       *       *       *       *

Well! dear ladies, I must e’en draw to an end; and I do beg you pardon
me, an if I have said aught to offend you. ’Tis very far from my
nature, whether inborn or gotten by education, to offend or displeasure
you in any wise. In what I say of women, I do speak of some, not of
all; and of these, I do use only false names and garbled descriptions.
I do keep their identity so carefully hid, none may discover it, and
never a breath of scandal can come on them but by mere conjecture and
vague suspicion, never by certain inference.

I fear me ’tis only too likely I have here repeated a second time
sundry witty sayings and diverting tales I have already told before in
my other Discourses. Herein I pray such as shall be so obliging as to
read all my works, to forgive me, seeing I make no pretence to being
a great Writer or to possess the retentive memory needful to bear all
in mind. The great Plutarch himself doth in his divers Works repeat
several matters twice over. But truly, they that shall have the task
of printing my books, will only need a good corrector to set all this
matter right.




       [Illustration: Decorative scrollwork above chapter start]




                                 NOTES


[1] P. 3:

 ◆At first this discourse was the last; it is outlined in the
  manuscript 608 as follows: “Discourse on why beautiful and faithful
  women love valiant men, and why worthy men love courageous women.”

[2] P. 5:

 ◆Virgil, in his Æneid (Bk. I), makes Penthesileia appear only after
  Hector’s death. For these accounts on the Amazons, consult _Traité
  historique sur les Amazones_, by Pierre Petit, Leyde, 1718.

[3] P. 6:

 ◆See Boccaccio, _De Claris Mulieribus_.

 ◆Æneid, IV., 10–13.

[4] P. 8:

 ◆A Latin work of Boccaccio in nine books.

 ◆Bk. IX., Chap. 3.

[5] P. 9:

 ◆_Nouvelle_, 1554–1574.

 ◆Bandello, t. III., p. 1 (Venice, 1558).

[6] P. 11:

 ◆The Duc d’Anjou, afterwards Henri III. of France, is meant. He was
  the third son of Henri II. and Catherine de Medici, and was born at
  Fontainebleau 1551. On the death of his brother Charles IX. in 1574
  he succeeded to the throne. Died 1589. The victories referred to
  are those of Jarnac and Montcontour.

[7] P. 12:

 ◆Ronsard, _Œuvres_, liv. 1, 174th sonnet.

[8] P. 13:

 ◆“Petit-Lit” is Leith,—the port of Edinburgh, on the Firth of Forth.
  The English army under Lord Grey of Wilton invaded Scotland in
  1560, and laid siege to Leith, then occupied by the French. The
  place was stubbornly defended, but must soon have fallen, when
  envoys were sent by Francis II. from France to conclude a peace.
  These were Monluc, Bishop of Valence, and the Sieur de Rendan
  mentioned in the text; the negotiators appointed to meet them on
  the English side were the Queen’s great minister Cecil and Wotton,
  Dean of Canterbury. The French troops were withdrawn.

 ◆The little Leith. (Cf. Jean de Beaugué, _Histoire de la guerre
  d’Ecosse_, reprinted by Montalembert in 1862, Bordeaux.)

 ◆Jacques de Savoie, Duke de Nemours, died in 1585.

 ◆Charles de La Rochefoucauld, Count de Randan, was sent to England in
  1559, where he arranged peace with Scotland.

[9] P. 14:

 ◆An imaginary king without authority.

 ◆Philibert le Voyer, lord of Lignerolles and of Bellefllle, was
  frequently employed as a diplomatic agent. He was in Scotland
  in 1567. He was assassinated at Bourgueil in 1571, because he
  was suspected of betraying Charles IX.’s avowal regarding Saint
  Bartholomew.

 ◆Brantôme knew quite well that the woman the handsome and alluring
  Duke de Nemours truly loved was no other than Mme. de Guise, Anne
  d’Este, whom he later married.

[10] P. 15:

 ◆XVIth Tale. Guillaume Gouffier, lord of Bonnivet.

 ◆Marguerite de Valois took Bussy d’Amboise partly because of his
  reputation as a duellist.

[11] P. 17:

 ◆Jacques de Lorge, lord of Montgomerie, captain of Francis I.’s
  Scotch Guard and father of Henri II.’s involuntary murderer.

[12] P. 18:

 ◆Claude de Clermont, Viscount de Tallard.

 ◆François de Hangest, lord of Genlis, captain of the Louvre, who died
  of hydrophobia at Strassburg in 1569.

[13] P. 19:

 ◆It is undoubtedly Louise de Halwin, surnamed Mlle. de Piennes the
  Elder, who later married Cipier of the Marcilly family.

 ◆It is to this feminine stimulation that King Francis I. alluded
  in the famous quatrain in the Album of Aix, which is rightly or
  wrongly attributed to him.

[14] P. 20:

 ◆Agnès Sorel, or Soreau, the famous mistress of Charles VII., was
  daughter of the Seigneur de St. Gérard, and was born at the village
  of Fromenteau in Touraine in 1409. From a very early age she was
  one of the maids of honour of Isabeau de Lorraine, Duchess of
  Anjou, and received every advantage of education. Her wit and
  accomplishments were no less admired than her beauty.

  She first visited the Court of France in the train of this latter
  Princess in 1431, where she was known by the name of the
  _Demoiselle_ de Fromenteau, and at once captivated the young King’s
  heart. She appeared at Paris in the Queen’s train in 1437, but was
  intensely unpopular with the citizens, who attributed the wasteful
  expenditure of the Court and the misfortunes of the Kingdom to her.
  Whatever may be the truth of Brantôme’s tale of the astrologer,
  there is no doubt as to her having exerted her influence to rouse
  the King from the listless apathy he had fallen into, and the idle,
  luxurious life he was leading in his Castle of Chinon, while the
  English were still masters of half his dominions.

  She was granted many titles and estates by her Royal lover,—amongst
  others the castle of Beauté, on the Marne, whence her title of La
  Dame de Beauté, and that of Loches, in the Abbey Church of which
  she was buried on her sudden death in 1450, and where her tomb
  existed down to 1792.

 ◆Charles VII., son of the mad Charles VI., born 1403, crowned at
  Poitiers 1422, but only consecrated at Reims in 1429, after the
  capture of Orleans and the victories due to Jeanne d’Arc. The
  adversary of the Burgundians and the English under the Duke of
  Bedford and Henry V. of England. Died 1461.

 ◆Henry V. of England, reigned, 1413–1422.

 ◆Bertrand du Guesclin, Constable of France, the most famous warrior
  of the XIVth Century, and one of the greatest Captains of any age,
  was born about 1314 near Rennes of an ancient and distinguished
  family of Brittany. He was the great champion of France in the wars
  with the English, and the tales of his prowess are endless. Died
  1380.

[15] P. 21:

 ◆Béatrix, fourth daughter of Raymond-Béranger IV., Count de Provence.

[16] P. 22:

 ◆Isabeau de Lorraine, daughter of Charles II., married René d’Anjou.

[17] P. 24:

 ◆He called himself René de La Platière, lord of Les Bordes, and was
  ensign in Field Marshal de Bourdillon’s company; he was killed at
  Dreux. He was the son of François de La Platière and Catherine
  Motier de La Fayette.

 ◆Brantôme, in his eulogy of Bussy d’Amboise, relates that he
  reprimanded that young man for his mania of killing. The woman whom
  he compares here to Angélique was Marguerite de Valois.

[18] P. 27:

 ◆Brantôme is unquestionably referring again in this paragraph to
  Marguerite de Valois and Bussy d’Amboise.

[19] P. 28:

 ◆_Orlando furioso_, canto V.

[20] P. 30:

 ◆That is why Marguerite de Valois turned away “that big disgusting
  Viscount de Turenne.” She compared him “to the empty clouds which
  look well only from without.” (_Divorce satyrique._)

 ◆This is very likely an adventure that happened to Brantôme, and he
  had occasion to play the rôle of the “gentilhomme content.”

[21] P. 32:

 ◆According to Lalanne, the two gentlemen are Le Balafré and
  Mayenne. If the “grande dame” was Marguerite, she bore Mayenne no
  grudge, whom she described as “a good companion, big and fat, and
  voluptuous like herself.”

[22] P. 37:

 ◆It is Madeleine de Saint-Nectaire or Senneterre, married to the lord
  of Miramont, Guy de Saint-Exupéry; she supported the Huguenots.
  She defeated Montal in Auvergne, and according to Mézeray, killed
  him herself in 1574. (See Anselme, t. IV., p. 890.) In 1569, Mme.
  de Barbancon had also fought herself; she, too, was formerly an
  Italian, Ipolita Fioramonti.

[23] P. 39:

 ◆On the large square with the tower, in the centre of Sienna.

[24] P. 40:

 ◆Livy, Bk. XXVII., Chap. XXXVII.

[25] P. 42:

 ◆_Orlando furioso_, cantos XXII. and XXV.

 ◆Christophe Jouvenel des Ursins, lord of La Chapelle, died in 1588.

 ◆Henri II.

[26] P. 44:

 ◆Ipolita Fioramonti, married to Luigi di Malaspina, of the Padua
  branch; she was general of the Duke of Milan’s armies. (Litta,
  Malaspina di Pavia, t. VIII., tav. xx.)

 ◆Famous fortified city and seaport on the Atlantic coast of France;
  800 miles S. W. of Paris, capital of the modern Department of
  Charente-Inférieure.

[27] P. 45:

 ◆The interview between François de La Noue, surnamed Bras-de-Fer
  (iron arm), and the representatives of Monsieur, François, Duke
  d’Alencon, took place February 21, 1573. The scene that Brantôme
  describes happened Sunday, February 22.

[28] P. 46:

 ◆What Brantôme advances here is to be found in Jacques de Bourbon’s
  _La grande et merveilleuse oppugnation de la noble cité de Rhodes_,
  1527.

 ◆The siege took place in 1536.

[29] P. 47:

 ◆August 14, 1536. Count de Nassau besieged Péronne at the head of
  60,000 men; the population defended itself with the uttermost
  energy. Marie Fouré, according to some, was the principal heroine
  of this famous siege; according to others, all the honor should go
  to Mme. Catherine de Foix. (Cf. _Pièces et documents relatifs au
  siège de Péronne, en 1536._ Paris, 1864.)

 ◆The siege of Sancerre began January 3, 1573; but the rôle of the
  women was more pacific than at Péronne; they nursed the wounded
  and fed the combatants. The energetic Joanneau governed the city.
  (Poupard, _Histoire de Sancerre_, 1777.)

 ◆Vitré was besieged by the Duke de Mercœuer in 1589. This passage of
  Brantôme’s is quoted in the _Histoire de Vitré_ by Louis Dubois
  (1839, pp. 87–88).

 ◆Péronne, a small fortified town of N. W. France, on the Somme and in
  the Department of same name. It was bombarded by the Prussians in
  1870, and the fine belfry of the XIVth Century destroyed. Its siege
  by the Comte de Nassau was in 1536.

 ◆Sancerre, a small town on the left bank of the Loire, modern
  Department of the Cher, 27 miles from Bourges. The Huguenots of
  Sancerre endured two terrible sieges in 1569 and 1573.

 ◆Vitré, a town of Brittany, modern Department Ille-et-Vilaine, of
  about 10,000 inhabitants. Retains its medieval aspect and town
  walls to the present day.

[30] P. 48:

 ◆Collenuccio, Bk. V.

[31] P. 49:

 ◆Boccaccio has arranged this story in his _De claries mulieribus_,
  cap. CI. Vopiscus, _Aurelius_, XXVI–XXX, relates this fact more
  coolly.

 ◆Zenobia, the famous Queen of Palmyra, widow of Odena—thus, who had
  been allowed by the weak Emperor Gallienus to participate in the
  title of Augustus, and had extended his empire over a great part
  of Asia Minor, Syria and Egypt. She was eventually defeated by
  Aurelian in a great battle on the Orontes not far from Antioch.
  Palmyra was destroyed, and its inhabitants massacred; and Zenobia
  brought in chains to Rome.

 ◆The Emperor Aurelian was born about 212 A. D., and was of very
  humble origin. He served as a soldier in almost every part of the
  Roman Empire, and rose at last to the purple by dint of his prowess
  and address in arms, succeeding Claudius in 270 A. D. Almost the
  whole of his short reign of four years and a half was occupied in
  constant fighting. Killed in a conspiracy 275 A. D.

[32] P. 53:

 ◆Perseus, the last King of Macedon, son of Philip V., came to the
  throne 179 B. C. His struggle with the Roman power lasted from 171
  to 165, when he was finally defeated at the battle of Pydna by the
  consul L. Aemilius Paulus. He was carried to Rome and adorned the
  triumph of his conqueror in 167 B. C., and afterwards thrown into a
  dungeon. He was subsequently released, however, on the intercession
  of Aemilius Paulus, and died in honourable captivity at Alba.

 ◆Maria of Austria, sister of Charles V., widow of Louis II. of
  Hungary, and ruler over the Netherlands; she died in 1558. It was
  against her rule that John of Leyden struggled.

 ◆Brantôme has in mind Aurelia Victorina, mother of Victorinus,
  according to Trebillius Pollio, _Thirty Tyrants_, XXX.

[33] P. 54:

 ◆In Froissart, liv. I, chap. 174.

 ◆Henri I., Prince de Condé, died in 1588 (January 5), poisoned, says
  the _Journal de Henri_, by his wife Catherine Charlotte de la
  Trémolle.

 ◆Isabella of Austria, daughter of Philip II.

 ◆Jeanne de Flandres.

[34] P. 55:

 ◆Jacquette de Montberon, Brantôme’s sister-in-law.

 ◆Machiavelli, Dell’arte della guerre, Bk. V., ii.

[35] P. 56:

 ◆Paule de Penthièvre, the second wife of Jean II. de Bourgogne, Count
  de Nevers.

[36] P. 57:

 ◆Richilde, Countess de Hainaut, who died in 1091.

 ◆Hugues Spencer, or le Dépensier.

 ◆Jean de Hainaut, brother of Count de Hainaut.

 ◆Cassel and Broqueron.

 ◆Edward II. of Caernarvon, King of England, was the fourth son of
  Edward I. and Queen Eleanor. Ascended the throne 1307, and married
  Isabel of France the following year. A cowardly and worthless
  Prince, and the tool of scandalous favourites, such as Piers
  Gaveston. Isabel and Mortimer landed at Orwell, in Suffolk, in
  1326, and deposed the King, who was murdered at Berkeley Castle,
  1327.

[37] P. 58:

 ◆Eleonore d’Acquitaine.

[38] P. 59:

 ◆Thevet wrote the _Cosmographie_; Nauclerus wrote a _Chronographie_.

[39] P. 60:

 ◆Vittoria Colonna, daughter of Fabrizio Colonna and of Agnes de
  Montefeltro, born in 1490, and affianced at the age of four to
  Ferdinand d’Avalos, who became her husband. The letter of which
  Brantôme speaks is famous; he found it in Vallès, fol. 205. As for
  Mouron, he was the great Chancellor Hieronimo Morone.

[40] P. 61:

 ◆Plutarch, _Anthony_, Chap. xiv.

[41] P. 62:

 ◆Catherine Marie de Lorraine, wife of Louis de Bourbon, Duke De
  Montpensier.

 ◆Henri III., assassinated at Paris, 1589.

[42] P. 65:

 ◆The _other man_ was Mayenne.

[43] P. 67:

 ◆Poltrot de Méré was tortured and quartered (March 18, 1563). As
  regards the admiral, he was massacred August 24, 1572.

[44] P. 68:

 ◆Philibert de Marcilly, lord of Cipierre, tutor of Charles IX.

[45] P. 71:

 ◆On this adventure, consult the Additions au Journal de Henri III.,
  note 2.

[46] P. 72:

 ◆Louis de Correa, _Historia de la conquista del reino de Navarra_.

[47] P. 76:

 ◆Louise de Savoie.

[48] P. 77:

 ◆Charlotte de Roye, married to Francis III. de La Rochefoucauld in
  1557; she died in 1559.

[49] P. 78:

 ◆Marguerite de Foix-Candale, married to Jean Louis de Nogaret, Duke
  d’Eperon.

[50] P. 79:

 ◆Renée de Bourdeille, daughter of André and Jacquette Montberon. She
  married, in 1579, David Bouchard, Viscount d’Aubeterre, who was
  killed in Périgord in 1593. She died in 1596. The daughter of whom
  Brantôme is about to speak was Hippolyte Bouchard, who was married
  to François d’Esparbez de Lussan. The three daughters whom he later
  mentions were: Jeanne, Countess de Duretal, Isabelle, Baroness
  d’Ambleville, and Adrienne, lady of Saint-Bonnet.

[51] P. 80:

 ◆Married subsequently to François d’Esparbez de Lussan, Maréchal
  d’Aubeterre.

[52] P. 83:

 ◆Renée de Clermont, daughter of Jacques de Clermont-d’Amboise,
  lord of Bussy; she was married to the incompetent Jean de
  Montluc-Balagny (bastard of the Bishop de Valence), created Field
  Marshal of France in 1594.

[53] P. 84:

 ◆Gabrielle d’Estrées.

[54] P. 85:

 ◆Popular song of the day; Musée de Janequin. See _Recueil_ of Pierre
  Atteignant.

[55] P. 89:

 ◆Renée Taveau, married to Baron Mortemart. François de Rochechouart.

[56] P. 91:

 ◆There is a copy of this sixth discourse in the MS. 4788, _du fonds
  français_, at the Bibliothèque Nationale: this copy is from the end
  of the sixteenth century.

[57] P. 92:

 ◆ Charlotte de Savoie, second wife of Louis XI., daughter of Louis,
  Duke de Savoie.

 ◆Louis XI. is generally supposed not only to have bandied many such
  stories with all the young bloods at the Court of Philippe le Bon,
  Duke of Burgundy, where he had taken refuge when Dauphin, but
  actually to have taken pains to have a collection of them made
  and afterwards published in the same order in which we have them,
  in the Work entitled “_Cent Nouvelles nouvelles_,” _lequel en soy
  contient cent chapitres ou histoires, composées ou récitées par
  nouvelles gens depuis naguères_,—“An Hundred New Romances,—a Work
  containing in itself an hundred chapters or tales, composed or
  recited by divers folk in these last years.” This is confirmed by
  the words of the original preface or notice, which would appear to
  have been written in his life-time: “And observe that throughout
  the _Nouvelles_, wherever ’tis said by _Monseigneur_, Monseigneur
  the Dauphin is meant, which hath since succeeded to the crown and
  is now King Louis XI.; for in those days he was in the Duke of
  Burgundy’s country.” But as it is absolutely certain this Prince
  only withdrew into Brabant at the end of the year 1456, and only
  returned to France in August 1461, it is quite impossible the
  Collection can have appeared in France about the year 1455, as
  is stated without sufficient consideration in the preface of the
  latest editions of this work. Two ancient editions are known,
  one,—Paris 1486, folio; the other also published at Paris, by the
  widow of Johan Treperre, N. D., also folio. Besides this, two
  modern editions, with badly executed cuts, printed at Cologne, by
  Pierre Gaillard, 1701 and 1736 respectively, 2 vols. 8vo.

[58] P. 93:

 ◆ By _Bourguignonne_ the King meant _étrangère_ (foreigner).

[59] P. 94:

 ◆See the sojourn of Charles VIII. at Lyons: _Séjours de Charles VIII.
  et Louis XII. à Lyon sur le Rosne jouxte la copie des faicts,
  gestes et victoires des roys Charles VIII. et Louis XII._, Lyon,
  1841.

 ◆Louis XII. had really been a “good fellow,” without mentioning
  the laundress of the court, who was rumored to be the mother of
  Cardinal de Bucy, he had known at Genoa Thomasina Spinola, with
  whom, according to Jean d’Authon, his relations were purely moral.

[60] P. 97:

 ◆Francis I. forbade by the decree of December 23, 1523, that any
  farces be played at the colleges of the University of Paris
  “Wherein scandalous remarks are made about the King or the princes
  or about the people of the King’s entourage.” (Clairambault, 824,
  fol. 8747, at the Biblilothèque Nationale.) This king maintained,
  as Brantôme says, that women are very fickle and inconstant; he
  wrote to Montmorency of his own sister Marguerite de Valois,
  November 8, 1537: “We may be sure that when we wish women to stop
  they are dying to trot along; but when we wish them to go they
  refuse to budge from their place.” (Clairambault, 336, fol. 6230,
  v^o.)

[61] P. 98:

 ◆Paul Farnese, Paul III.—1468–1549.

 ◆The queen arrived at Nice, June 8, 1538, where the king and Pope
  Paul III. were. The ladies of whom Brantôme speaks should be the
  Queen of Navarre, Mme. de Vendôme, the Duchess d’Etampes, the
  Marquess de Rothelin—that beautiful Rohan of whom it was said that
  her husband would get with child and not she—and thirty-eight
  gentlewomen. (Clair., 336, fol. 6549.)

 ◆John Stuart, Duke of Albany, grandson of James II., King of
  Scotland. He was born in France in 1482 and died in 1536. The
  anecdote that Brantôme relates is connected with the journey of
  Clement VI. to Marseilles at the time of the marriage of Henri
  II., then Duke d’Orléans, with the niece of the pope, Catherine de
  Medici. The marriage took place at Marseilles in 1533.

[62] P. 100:

 ◆Louise de Clermont Tallard, who married as her second husband the
  Duc d’Uzes. Jean de Taix was the grand master of artillery.

[63] P. 107:

 ◆He was called Pierre de La Mare, lord of Matha, master of the horse
  to Marguerite, sister of the king. (Bib. Nat., Cabinet des Titres,
  art. Matha.) Aimée de Méré was at the court from 1560 to 1564.
  Hence this adventure took place during that time. (Bib. Nat. ms.
  français 7856, fol. 1186, v^o.)

[64] P. 108:

 ◆Povided with “bards,” plate-armour used to protect a horse’s breast
  and flanks.

[65] P. 109:

 ◆This Fontaine-Guérin was in all likelihood Honorat de Bueil, lord of
  Fontaine-Guérin, gentleman of the king’s bed-chamber, councillor of
  State, who died in 1590. He was a great favorite of Charles IX.

[66] P. 112:

 ◆The lady in question was Françoise de Rohan, dame de La Garnache, if
  we are to believe Bayle in the _Dict. Critique_, p. 1817, 2nd. ed.,
  though there would seem to be some doubt about it. The “very brave
  and gallant Prince” was the Duc de Nemours.

 ◆A German dance, the _Facheltanz_.

[67] P. 113:

 ◆Marie de Flamin.

[68] P. 114:

 ◆The son of this lady was Henri d’Angoulème, who killed Altoviti and
  was killed by him at Aix, and not at Marseilles, June 2, 1586.
  Philippe Altoviti was the Baron of Castellane; he had married the
  beautiful Renée de Rieux-Châteauneuf.

[69] P. 115:

 ◆_Le Tigre_—a pamphlet by François Hotman directed against the
  Cardinal de Lorraine and the Duchesse de Guise, 1560.

[70] P. 116:

 ◆Philibert de Marcilly, lord of Cipierre.

[71] P. 117:

 ◆That pamphlet was aimed at Anne d’Este, Duchess de Guise, at the
  time of her marriage with the Duc de Nemours.

[72] P. 119:

 ◆Brantôme alludes to the hatred of the Duchess de Montpensier.

[73] P. 120:

 ◆Marie de Clèves, who died during her lying-in in 1574.

 ◆Catherine Charlotte de La Trémolle, Princess de Condé.

[74] P. 122:

 ◆Not found anywhere in Brantôme’s extant works.

[75] P. 125:

 ◆Du Guast or Lignerolles. However, it may refer to Bussy d’Amboise.


[76] P. 126:

 ◆Marie Babou de la Bourdaisière, who married Claude de Beauvillier
  Saint-Aignan in 1560.

[77] P. 128:

 ◆Plutarch, _Sylla_, cap. XXX.

[78] P. 129:

 ◆Queen Maria of Hungary, ruler of the Netherlands, and sister of
  Charles V.

 ◆Plutarch, _Cato of Utica_, cap. XXXV.

[79] P. 132:

 ◆The personages in question are Henri III., Renée de
  Rieux-Châteauneuf, then Mme. de Castellane, and Marie de Clèves,
  wife of the Prince de Condé.

 ◆Louis de Condé, who deserted Isabeau de La Tour de Limeuil to marry
  Françoise d’Orléans. The beauty of which Brantôme speaks can
  scarcely be seen in the portrait in crayon of Isabeau de Limeuil
  who became Mme. de Sardini.

[80] P. 135:

 ◆Mottoes were constantly used at that time.

[81] P. 136:

 ◆Anne de Bourbon, married in 1561 to François de Clèves, Duke de
  Nevers and Count d’Eu.

[82] P. 146:

 ◆The empress was Elizabeth of Portugal; the Marquis de Villena, M.
  de Villena; the Duke de Feria, Gomez Suarez de Figueroa, Duke de
  Feria; Eleonor, the Queen of Portugal, later married to François
  I^{er}; Queen Marie, the Queen of Hungary.

[83] P. 147:

 ◆Elizabeth, daughter of Henri II.

[84] P. 151:

 ◆The MS. of this discourse is at the Bibliothèque Nationale (Ms. fr.
  3273); it is written in a good hand of the end of the sixteenth
  century. It is dedicated to the Duke d’Alençon.

[85] P. 152:

 ◆_Opere_ di G. Boccaccio, _Il Filicopo_, Firenze, 1723, t. II., p. 73.

[86] P. 159:

 ◆_La Tournelle_ in the original. This was the name given to the
  Criminal Court of the Parliament of Paris.

[87] P. 161:

 ◆Barbe de Cilley; she died in 1415.

[88] P. 166:

 ◆Brantôme is undoubtedly referring to Mme. de Villequier.

[89] P. 172:

 ◆This is again Isabeau de La Tour Limeuil.

[90] P. 178:

 ◆See XXVth Tale in _Cent Nouvelles nouvelles_.

[91] P. 188:

 ◆Honoré Castellan.

 ◆Baron de Vitteau was this member of the Du Prat family; he killed
  Louis de Béranger du Guast.

[92] P. 190:

 ◆Chicot was Henri III.’s jester who killed M. de La Rochefoucauld on
  Saint Bartholomew’s Day.

[93] P. 194:

 ◆_Alberic de Rosate_, under the word “Matrimonium” in his
  _Dictionary_ reports an exactly similar instance. _Barbatias_ has
  something even more extraordinary, how a boy of seven got his nurse
  with child.

[94] P. 195:

 ◆The Queen Mother Catherine de Medici. The author gives her name in
  his book of the _Dames Illustres_, where he tells the same story.

[95] P. 207:

 ◆Jean de Rabodanges, who married Marie de Clèves, mother of Louis
  XII. She was _reine blanche_, that is, she was in mourning; at that
  time the women of the nobility wore white when in mourning.

[96] P. 207:

 ◆These eighteen chevaliers, who were elevated in one batch, caused a
  good deal of gossip at the court.

[97] P. 214:

 ◆Louis de Béranger du Guast.

[98] P. 216:

 ◆She was thirty-five; she died three years later.

[99] P. 217:

 ◆It is the Château d’Usson in Auvergne.

[100] P. 218:

 ◆Louis de Saint-gelais-Lansac.

[101] P. 220:

 ◆Jeanne, married to Jean, Prince of Portugal. She died in 1578.

[102] P. 225:

 ◆Sébastien, died in 1578. This passage in Brantôme is not one of the
  least irreverent of this hardened sceptic.

[103] P. 226:

 ◆The portraits of Marie disclose a protruding mouth. She is generally
  represented with a cap over her forehead. This feature is to be
  found in a marked degree in Queen Eleanore; and her brother Charles
  V. also had a protruding mouth. The drooping lip was likewise
  characteristic of all the later Dukes de Bourgogne.

[104] P. 228:

 ◆The entanglements of which Brantôme speaks were: the revolt of the
  Germanats, in Spain, in 1522; of Tunis or Barbarie, 1535; the
  troubles in Italy, also in 1535; the revolt in the Netherlands,
  provoked by the taxes imposed by Maria, in 1540. M. de Chièvres was
  Guillaume de Croy.

[105] P. 229:

 ◆Folembray, the royal residence occupied by François I^{er} and later
  by Henri II. Henri IV. negotiated there with Mayenne during the
  Ligue.

 ◆Bains en Hainaut.

[106] P. 230:

 ◆Claude Blosset, surnamed Torcy, lady of Fontaine Chalandray.

[107] P. 234:

 ◆Christine of Denmark, daughter of Christian II., first married to
  Francesco Maria Sforza, Duke of Milan. In 1540, five years after
  her husband’s death, she married Francis I. of Lorraine. Her son
  was Charles II. of Lorraine.

 ◆N. de La Brosse-Mailly.

[108] P. 285:

 ◆A small plank attached to the saddle of a lady’s horse, and serving
  to support the rider’s feet. Superseded by the single stirrup and
  pommel.

[109] P. 236:

 ◆Guy du Faur de Pybrac.

[110] P. 243:

 ◆Renée, wife of Guillaume V., Duke de Bavière.

[111] P. 246:

 ◆Blanche de Montferrat, wife of Charles I^{er}, Duke de Savoie; she
  died in 1509.

[112] P. 247:

 ◆Paradin, _Chronique de Savoye_, III, 85.

 ◆The seneschal’s lady of Poitou was Mme. de Vivonne.

[113] P. 249:

 ◆Nicolas de Lorraine-Vaudemont, father-in-law of Henri III.

 ◆Françoise d’Orléans, widow of Louis, Prince de Condé.

[114] P. 250:

 ◆Louise, daughter of Nicolas de Lorraine-Vaudemont, married in 1575;
  she died in 1601.

[115] P. 252:

 ◆Jean de Talleyrand, former ambassador at Rome.

[116] P. 255:

 ◆Refers of course to the assassination of Henri III., by the monk
  Clément (1589).

[117] P. 256:

 ◆Marguerite de Lorraine, whose second marriage was with François de
  Luxembourg, Duke de Piney.

 ◆Mayenne, Duke du Maine.

 ◆Aymard de Chastes.

[118] P. 257:

 ◆Catherine de Lorraine.

[119] P. 273:

 ◆Jean Dorat, died in 1588. Louis de Béranger du Guast.

[120] P. 280:

 ◆Caesar Borgia, son of Pope Alexander VI.

 ◆Thomas de Foix, lord of Lescun, brother of Mme. de Châteaubriant.

 ◆Piero Strozzi, Field Marshal of France.

[121] P. 281:

 ◆Jean de Bourdeille, brother of Brantôme. He died at the age of
  twenty-five at the siege of Hesdin. It was from him that the joint
  title of Brantôme passed on to our author.

 ◆Henri de Clermont, Viscount de Tallard.

 ◆André de Soleillas, Bishop of Riez in Provence, in 1576. He had a
  mistress who was given to playing the prude, but whose hypocrisy
  did not deceive King Henri IV. That Prince, one day rebuking this
  lady for her love affairs, said her only delight was in _le jeune
  et l’oraison_,—fast and prayer.

[122] P. 282:

 ◆This widow of a Field Marshal of France was very likely the lady
  of Field Marshal de Saint-André. She wedded as a second husband
  Geoffroi de Caumont, abbé de Clairac. She called herself Marguerite
  de Lustrac. As for Brantôme’s aunt, it should be Philippe de
  Beaupoil; she married La Chasteignerie, and as a second husband
  François de Caumont d’Aymé.

[123] P. 285:

 ◆Anne d’Anglure de Givry, son of Jeanne Chabot and René d’Anglure
  de Givry. Jeanne married as a second husband Field Marshal de La
  Chastre.

 ◆ Jean du Bellay and Blanche de Tournon.

[124] P. 288:

 ◆Odet de Coligny, Cardinal de Chastillon, married to Elizabeth de
  Hauteville.

[125] P. 290:

 ◆Henri II., who neglected his wife, the Queen, for the Duchesse de
  Valentinois (Diane de Poitiers), who was already quite an old woman
  and had been his father, the preceding King’s, mistress.

[126] P. 293:

 ◆About the year 400 of the Christian era, St. Jerome witnessed the
  woman’s funeral, and he it is reports the fact mentioned in the
  text. _Epist. ad Ageruchiam, De Monogamia._

 ◆Charles de Rochechouart.

[127] P. 302:

 ◆Scio was taken in 1566 by the Turks.

[128] P. 309:

 ◆It was to her that King Henri IV. said at a court ball by way of
  amusing the company, that she had used green wood and dry wood
  both. This jest he made at her expense, because the said lady did
  never spare any other woman’s good name.

[129] P. 310:

 ◆L’histoire et Plaisante cronique du Petit Jehan de Saintré, par
  Antoine de La Salle. Paris, 1517.

[130] P. 312:

 ◆XLVth Tale.

[131] P. 314:

 ◆According to Rabelais, _poultre_ (filly) is the name given to a mare
  that has never been leapt. So Bussy was not speaking with strict
  accuracy in using the term in this case.

[132] P. 316:

 ◆An allusion to the affair of Jarnac, who killed La Chasteignerie,
  Brantôme’s uncle, in a duel (1547) with an unexpected and decisive
  thrust of the sword.

 ◆Alesandro de Medici, killed, in 1537, by his cousin Lorenzino.

[133] P. 317:

 ◆Mme. de Chateaubriant.

[134] P. 318:

 ◆Perhaps Marguerite de Valois and the ugly Martigues.

[135] P. 321:

 ◆The one-eyed Princess d’Eboli and the famous Antonio Perez.

[136] P. 323:

 ◆Jeanne de Poupincourt.

[137] P. 324:

 ◆Anne de Berri, Lady de Certeau, at the court in 1583. Hélène de
  Fonsèques.

 ◆This princess was very ugly.

[138] P. 330:

 ◆In the sixteenth century it was customary to whip lazy people in
  bed. See Marot’s epigram: Du Jour des Innocens.


                           END OF VOLUME TWO


               —————————————— End of Book ——————————————




                    Transcriber’s Note (continued)


The book contains long passages of older French in which the reader
will notice many flaws in grammar, spelling and accents. These may make
some of the French difficult to read but it will be obvious that this
cannot be fixed without sometimes inadvertently changing the intended
meaning. For that reason all passages in French are presented unchanged
in this transcription.

Similarly with the passages in Italian and Spanish.

For the rest of the text, the many inconsistencies in English spelling,
capitalisation, and hyphenation have been left unchanged except where
noted below. Other minor typographical errors have been corrected
without note.

  Page xxviii – “or” changed to “of” (a contemporary of)

  Page 93 – “nay” changed to “any” (scarce any account of her)

  Page 126 – “may” changed to “many” (how many stages)

  Page 138 – “Fontainbleau” changed to “Fontainebleau”
             (at Fontainebleau)

  Page 259 – “Randam” changed to “Randan” (Madame de Randan)

  Page 290 – “Cnæus” changed to “Gnæus” (Gnæus Pompeius)

                              ——————————

The numbered references to endnotes on the pages of the book are
incorrect in most cases. Many other pages of the book should have
had references to endnotes but those references are missing.

In order to reindex the references in this transcription, a temporary
‘placeholder’ reference was added to those pages where there should
have been at least one numbered reference to endnotes but it was
omitted in the book.

The transcriber has retained these placeholder references as they are
helpful to the reader. Placeholder references are distinguished by an
asterisk next to the index number (as in [99*], for example). Their
role is exactly the same as that of the references originally present
in the book; namely to direct the reader to the correct page header in
the endnotes. Under that page header will be found all the author’s
notes relevant to the page.

Where originally there were more than one numbered reference to
endnotes on a page of the book, these now have the same index number
in this transcription. That index number links to the respective page
header in the endnotes.

Endnotes have been reformatted so that each separate note is
distinguished by a prefixing ◆ character.


*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIVES OF FAIR AND GALLANT
LADIES. VOL 2. ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
